 Additional Praise for Scaling Up

 "There is no one in the business of the business world like Verne Harnish.
 "Unlike all too many authors and gurus who are obsessed by statistics, followers of the latest trends, and seekers of
  celebrity, Verne is firmly centered on the success and well-being of business leaders, who respect, trust, and ben-
   efit from the thinking, assistance, and advocacy of this passionate protagonist of our global business community.
     Verne is genuinely devoted to the business challenges and ambitions of his vast population of loyalists. A day
    doesn't pass without his instant response to requests for help. He has an uncanny ability to connect businesses
 with reliable resources who can make invaluable contributions to their success.
      "Now, Verne has published a new book filled with timely insights about the benefits and problems associated
       with scalability. For everyone who is curious about barriers to growth; concerned about what's around the
corner; or suffering from unrelenting 3 a.m. nightmares about their businesses' sustainability and that urgent
       need for an aggressive new growth strategy, this is a 'got-to-read-right-now' book from today's compulsive
 storyteller of business content, Verne Harnish."
                             — Robert H. Bloom, strategist and author of The Inside Advantage and The New Experts

        "Scaling up is every entrepreneur's dream — and nightmare. Hypergrowth is terrifying, and it's most often
     success that kills great companies. This book goes way beyond advice, offering specific habits, processes, and
      outlines to ensure that growth is the beginning, not the end, of success. Nobody understands the day-to-day
     reality of hypergrowth like Verne Harnish, and his book is full of the tough love you'd want from an outstand-
      ing mentor: fully aware of the challenges but determined to overcome, not duck, them. With great structured
      thinking and not a word wasted, highly appreciative of the value of time, and immune to sentiment, this book
 will help anyone determined and smart enough to follow its advice."
                                                 - Margaret Heffernan, serial entrepreneur and author of
                                                 33             Willful Blindness, Women on Top, and A Bigger Prize

"Delivers the practical lessons that most B-schools don't. If you want to grow your business faster, buy Scaling Up
turn to Chapter 14, and read 'The Power of One.' Not next week. Not tomorrow. Now."
                             — John Mullins, professor of entrepreneurship at London Business School, and author of
               The Customer-Funded Business, The New Business Road Test, and (with Randy Komisar) Getting to Plan B

 "Scaling Up is a blueprint for building a growth company. With this book, Verne has pulled back the curtain on
how the fastest-growing companies in the world fuel their growth. Scaling Up gives you an insider's view into
the inner workings of the most successful companies on earth. A must-read for an ambitious entrepreneur."
 — John Warrillow, founder of The Sellability Score and author of The Automatic Customer: Creating a Subscription
                      Business in Any Industry and Built to Sell: Creating a Business That Can Thrive Without You

       "I didn't think it possible to discuss Strategy and Cash in the same book — or People and Execution in the
     same book, for that matter — but Scaling Up deals with all four topics in a compelling way. Verne Harnish and
       team have found juicy examples and simple rules that will help any growing business avoid costly mistakes.
A great read for entrepreneurs and anyone trying to be a personal engine for growth in any organization."
               — Richard A. Moran, CEO of Accretive Solutions and author of Navigating Tweets, Feats, and Deletes

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

    SCALING UP
    How a Few Companies Make It..
    and Why the Rest Don't



     Verne Harnish
and the team at Gazelles

    Gazelles
    GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES






Keep on learning and growing!
        Verne Harnish

  Gazelles Inc.
Ashburn, Virginia

---

    SCALING UP: How a Few Companies Make It. ..and Why the Rest Don't
    Copyright © 2014 by Gazelles East Pte. Ltd. Alrights reserved.

    No part of this book may be used, reproduced, or stored in a retrieval
    system, or transmitted in any form or by any means —
    electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise
    without the express written permission of the publisher.

    Published by Gazelles Inc., Ashburn, Virginia
    www.gazelles.com

    First Edition
         ISBN 978-0-9860195-9-3

Printed in the United States of America

    10987654321

---

THE DEDICATION
A city with scaleups, moves up; a country with gazelles excels.
To the leaders who scaleup companies — and their families and teams that support them. You are
the engines of our economies and the source of our freedom.

---

Scaling Up
                  THE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                                  Thank You!

      First, we want to thank the thousands of CEOs and executives who have utilized our open-source
    tools and provided input on how to improve them and their application to scaling up organizations.
Your contribution to the community of "gazelles" is greatly appreciated.

  Business Leaders
     Several of these leaders and their companies are highlighted throughout the book. Thank you for
  openly sharing your stories and lessons learned so that we might all benefit, specifically: Rob Banks,
         Jeff Booth, Gene Browne, Dwight Cooper, Fred Crosetto, John DeHart, Gunjan Doshi, Barret
       Ersek, Mark Fullerton, Ben Godsey, Sam Goodner, Vishal Gupta, Roger Hardy, Jack Harrington,
     Alan Higgins, Nelson Jacobson, Mike Jagger, Kees de Jong, Rick Kay, Clate Mask, Henry McGovern,
      Lois Melbourne, Sanjeev Mohanty, Simon Morrison, Scott Nash, James Perly, David Rich, Stephen
     Roche, Alan Rudy, Ken Sim, Naomi Simson, Carey Smith, Jerry South, Adam Sproule, John Stepleton,
  Scott Tannas, and Graham Weston.
   Two entrepreneurs went way beyond the call of duty to review the galley copy and provide extensive,
  critical, and detailed feedback, which resulted in significant changes to the style, approach, format,
    and design of the book: Kevin Daum, serial entrepreneur, author, and brilliant columnist for Inc.
      Magazine; and Jimmy Calano, founder of CareerTrack, who gave Verne his start as an author and
    was one of the early investors in Gazelles. Everything you like about Scaling Up, credit them. Ev-
  erything you don't, it's likely because we ignored their advice!

  Thought Leaders
  We've always believed it takes a "village of gurus" to help a company scale up, and it's no different
    for Gazelles and the content in this book. We would like to especially thank Jim Collins, the late
  W. Edwards Deming, Pat Lencioni, Tom Peters, Hermann Simon, and Jack Stack. Their pioneering
       contributions to the world of business have helped millions and shaped many of the ideas you
    find in this book. In addition, we would like to thank Greg Alexander, David Allen, John Assaraf,
     Laurie Bassi, Josh Bernoff, Bob Bloom, Travis Bradberry, Greg Brenneman, Mark Burton, Jim Cecil,
       Ram Charan, Robert Cialdini, Chip Conley, the late Stephen Covey, Stephen M.R. Covey, Aubrey
        Daniels, Peter Diamandis, Mohamed Fathelbab, Frances Frei, Seth Godin, Marshall Goldsmith,
         Mark Goulston, Vijay Govindarajan, Adam Grant, Brian Halligan, Brad Hams, Darren Hardy,
         Chip Heath, Margaret Heffernan, Sally Hogshead, Luke Hohmann, Tony Hsieh, Mark Johnson,
      Rick Kash, Eric Keiles, Dave Kerpen, Todd Klein, Jim Kouzes, Mike Lieberman, Giovanni Livera,
        Jim Loehr, David Marquet, Ron McMillan, James McQuivey, Ari Meisel, Youngme Moon, Geoffrey
       Moore, Richard Moran, Anne Morriss, John Mullins, Alexander Osterwalder, Bob Parsons, Daniel
     Pink, Joe Pulizzi, Fred Reichheld, Rich Russakoff, Tom Sant, David Meerman Scott, Robin Sharma,
   Brian Souza, Jim Stengel, Jeff Thull, Bill Treasurer, Lynne Twist, John Warrillow, Pat Williams, and
        Liz Wiseman — all of whom have contributed to our various Growth Summits around the world
 and our continuing online course offerings.

 vi

---

                                     The Acknowledgements
  Marketing and Coaching Partners
        Crial  spreading the s our tools round the world are ur markeig partners: Patric Cheo,
     Southeast Asia; Gautam Ganglani, Middle East; Daniel Marcos, Latin America; Pieter van Osch,
  Netherlands; Christo Popov, Eastern Europe; Raghu Potini, India; and Eric Schmidt, China.
  We also want to thank our growing association of coaching partners around the globe, led by Keith
  Cupp, and his team at Gazelles International, including Jean Carpenter, Maureen Chan-Hefflin,
      Cindy Kraft, Mary Rarick, and Debbie Trimble. Many of our Gazelles International Certified
   Coaches (and those completing their certification) read through an advance copy of this book and
     provided detailed feedback. These partners include Betsy Allen, John Anderson, David Baney,
       Kenyon Blunt, Andy Buyting, Elizabeth Crook, Rick Crossland, Doug Diamond, Will Ditzler,
     Glen Dobbie, Michael Duke, Hayley Erner, Ken Estridge, Robert Fish, Jerry Fons, Brad Giles,
     Mike Goldman, Lluis Gras, Jeremy Han, Lynn Hartrick, Nicolas Hauff (and his son Christopher)
     Jon Iveson, Hazel Jackson, Christopher Kenny, Avtar Hari Singh Khalsa, Cheryl Beth Kuchler,
      Matt Kuttler, Neale Lewis, Michael Mirau, Jeff Moore, Bahaa Moukadam, Paul O'Kelly, Craig
    Overmyer, Jeff Redmon, Ted Sarvata, Terry Schaefer, Nicholas Scott, Howard Shore, Rob Simons,
  Shannon Susko, and Monte Wyatt

  Key Collaborators
    There were a handful of key collaborators without whom this book would not have become a reality:
 Patrick Thean, who worked closely with Verne to create the original version of the Growth Tools;
   Kevin Lawrence, who provided significant help in updating the tools and served as an early sounding
      board in shaping the "Execution" content; and Greg Crabtree and Alan Miltz (and his team), who
 contributed much of the "Cash" content, which was sorely missing in the first draft. A special
   thank-you to Sebastian Ross, peer coach and dear friend, who contributed extensively to the "People"
 content and met weekly to review and provide important feedback for the entire book.

The Council and Team
    Gazelles' "council" provided important support, encouragement, and feedback throughout the process
     of creating the book. This team includes the CEOs of the various Gazelles companies: Keith Cupp,
     Gazelles International; Daniel Marcos, Gazelles Growth Institute; Steve Sansom, Gazelles Growth
   Capital; John Ratliff, GazellesPro; Kaihan Krippendorff, Gazelles Strategy; Sebastian Ross, Gazelles
People; Jeff Freemyer, Gazelles 360; and Andy Bailey, Align for Gazelles.
       We would like to especially thank the team at Gazelles HQ, including Joanne Costello, Missy
Giltner, Kathleen McKune, and Donna Whitwell. Missy provided overall project management for
  the book, keeping us on deadline and driving all the extensive details (printing, distribution, ware-
     housing) of getting a book self-published. And thank you to our outsourced technology team, led
       by Raghu Potini — with direct support from Amruth Mekala, Dayanand Chilveri, Purity Correia,
   and Praveen Salitra, who created and continually update the scalingup.com and gazelles.com websites
and distribute the "weekly insights."


vii

---

Scaling Up


    -

h  cv Goy  .

Family and Friends
Thank you to Stephen and Shelly Watkins, Derek and Rachel Benham, Craig and Linda Husted,
and Rajeev and Arpita Agarwal for their support (and homes) in providing hideouts for completing
the book. And a special thank-you to Catalan friend and partner Cesar Martinell
Last, thank you to Verne's wife, Julie, and four children, Cameron, Cole, Jade, and Quinn, for their
support and patience through the writing of this book. And to his mom, Jan, on whose 80th birthday
this book was published.










vii

---

THE TABLE OF CONTENTS



  THE INTRODUCTION Tools for Scaling Up                                     1
   THE ovERviEW People, Strategy, Execution, Cash                            3
   THE BARRIERS Leadership, Infrastructure, and Marketing                   21

  SCALING UP PEOPLE
   Introduction                                                             35
  3 THE LEADERS The FACe and PACe of the Company.                           41
   THE TEAM Attracting and Hiring                                           59
   THE MANAGERS (COACHES) Keeping and Growing (Educating) the Team          69

  SCALING UP STRATEGY
   Introduction                                                            85
   THE coRE Values, Purpose, and Competencies                              93
   THE 7 STRATA OF STRATEGY The Framework for Dominating Your Industry     107
  THE ONE-PAGE STRATEGIC PLAN The TOol for Strategic Planning              123

 SCALING UP EXECUTION
   Introduction                                                            145
   THE PRioRITY Focus, Finish Lines, and Fun                               149
  10 THE DATA Powering Prediction                                           161
  THE MEETING RHYTHM The Heartbeat of the Organization                      175

 SCALING UP CASH
   Introduction                                                           195
  12THE cASH Accelerating Cash Flow                                       199
  13THE ACCOUNTING Driving Profitability                                  207
  THE PoWER OF ONE 7 Key Financial Levers                                 219

 NEXT StEPS 5 Things to Do Now                                            235
 KEY RESOURCES                                                            240
 INDEX                                                                    243




 ix

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

THE INTRODUCTION
Tools for Scaling Up



 Ifyou want to teach people a new way of thinking, don't bother trying to teach them. Instead, give them a tool,
 the use of which will lead to new ways of thinking.
                                                                                         - R. Buckminster Fuller
                                                                                    Designer, inventor, futurist


   I nfusionsoft, an Arizona-based provider of customer relationship management software, secured $54
    I million in growth capital from Goldman Sachs in 2013 and used the money to improve its product,
  invest in better services, and expand its customer base. Infusionsoft grew 53% the year before, with
 a $50 million run rate, and has plans to grow to $200 million and 100,000 small business customers
 by the end of 2016. Its #1 priority for 2013 was to increase its score from the Net Promoter System.
  Infusionsoft is a "gazelle."
       "One of my team members took a picture of me while I was
       signing the deal [with Goldman Sachs]," Clate Mask, CEO
      of Infusionsoft, told Verne. "At the time, we were at our
        monthly off-site meeting, working on our 2013 and mid-
      range plans. We were frequently referring to Mastering the
  Rockefeller Habits that day, and it happens to be in the picture.
       The Rockefeller Habits and its tools are discussed on a
        weekly basis among our leadership team. Your work has
 made a big impact on our company.
 It's been 12 years since Mastering the Rockefeller Habits was
     first released. Scaling Up (Mastering the Rockefeller Habits
     2.0) is the first major revision. Having spent over 30 years
      helping more than 40,000 business leaders like Mask scale
      up their ventures, we've learned that CEOs and executives
       of growth firms want ideas and tools they can implement
        immediately to improve some aspect of their business —
 and want to enjoy the ride along the way!

---

Scaling Up

.. So How Is This Book Different From Mastering the Rockefeller Habits?
If you've not read Mastering the Rockefeller Habits, you can skip that book. If you have read it, here's
what's new:
 Scaling Up is organized around the 4 Decisions a leader must address: People, Strategy
   Execution, and Cash. This structure provides you with a more comprehensive look into the
   issues you face in growing a business (75% of it is new material).
 2.Our One-Page Strategic Plan has been updated extensively and is supported by a more
    robust strategic-thinking tool called the 7 Strata of Strategy. This tool will help you craft an
    industry-dominating strategy.
  3There are six new one-page tools, including a simplified Vision Summary document that
    will make it easier to communicate the vision of your organization to employees and others.
  4.We moved the practical examples, gleaned from more than 50 interviews with CEOs using
    our tools, from the appendix (no one reads an appendix!) and placed them throughout the
    main chapters.
 5.We share our take on why certain techniques — like the daily huddle — falter. This will save
   you time (and frustration) in implementing the Rockefeller Habits.
What hasn't changed is the style. Just as we were writing this introduction, Verne received a note
from entrepreneur Ray Lambert, who exclaimed: "You have written a book exactly like I like to read.
You get TO THE DAD GUM POINT! I love it."
Mastering the Rockefeller Habits has helped tens of thousands of leaders of growing firms. We hope
you find Scaling Up to be an even more practical resource.

Most Important Routine/Habit
Leaders are readers. When Larry Page, CEO of Google was asked how he learned to run a company,
he responded "I read a lot." For instance, he read three books on how to name things. Bill Gates, for
decades, maintained his famous "Think Week", devouring a record 112 books/articles/whitepapers
during one session.
Mark Cuban, the outspoken owner of the Dallas Mavericks, reads 3 hours per day. His goal is to
find just one idea he can use to give him and the over 150 companies in which he's invested an edge
in the marketplace. Mark Zuckerberg's personal development priority in 2015 was reading a book
every two weeks, exceeding by two the number of books (24/year) Topgrading author Brad Smart
found separated A-player executives from B and C players
And Charlie Munger, reflecting in 2015 on the 50-year record of investing by his partner Warren Buffett,
credited "his (Warren's) first priority would be reservation of much time for quiet reading and thinking,
particularly that which might advance his determined learning, no matter how old he became."
All these great biz leaders know one thing — nothing interesting can come out of your brain that
you don't put in first. Having a natural curiosity and thirst for learning separates the good from the
great in our experience. Happy reading!

2

---

   THE OVERVIEW
   People, Strategy, Execution, Cash



                        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: A 20-minute overview providing busy executives with a summary of the
practical tools and techniques for scaling up a business. Aligned around 4 Decisions every business leader must
make — People, Strategy, Execution, and Cash — they also represent the four main sections of this book where
    more specific how-to information, along with mini-case studies and examples, are detailed.
               WARNING: This overview contains a lot of lists to keep it concise — you'll be drinking from a
    fire hose! But it will prep you for the rest of the book where the ideas will be served up in more bite-
    sized pieces. You might also want to read the last, three-page-long chapter titled "Next Steps.

    Start up, Scale up, Sc@%w up ..
    ... or Stall out (fail to scale)!

    his sequence describes the life cycle of most businesses as they move up the S-shaped curve of
    growth. The key to scaling this curve:
    Attracting and keeping the right People;
    Creating a truly differentiated Strategy;
    3.Driving flawless Execution; and
    4.Having plenty of Cash to weather the storms.

       Millions of people start new  Life Cycle of Companies
     ventures, and of those that sur-
      vive, 96% remain "mice." It's  Start Up     Scale Up     Sc@%w Up
      only a few — the "gazelles" or
       scaleups - that scale beyond
      $10 million, $100 million, or
     $1 billion in revenue, the path
      that Clate Mask's Infusionsoft
       (mentioned in "The Introduc-
    tion") is on. This book gives you
    the tools to scale up 10x.       Mice         Gazelles     Elephants


    3

---

Scaling Up

      Eventually, many growing firms — gazelles — get sold, some to "elephants" (and a rare few grow
    up to become elephants themselves), often crushing the innovative culture of what was a thriving,
      growing company. Completing the cycle, many of these big companies turn bad - often downright
    evil — and later become extinct or irrelevant at best. (Read Nassim Nicholas Taleb's breakthrough
     book Antifragile: Things That Gain From Disorder for ways to inoculate your family, company, and
country from this tragic ending.)
   Because of the sheer number of start-ups and small businesses, there is a huge market for the myriad
       number of books supporting these entrepreneurs — the two best being Michael E. Gerber's The
     E-Myth Revisited and Eric Ries' The Lean Startup. The large number of entrepreneurs also forms a
significant enough voting bloc to garner attention from politicians.

In turn, the sheer size of the Fortune 500 companies provides a huge feeding trough for the thou-
   sands of business gurus and the 11,000 new business books they release each year. These large firms
 employ expensive lobbyists to do their bidding with governments, receiving all kinds of special favors.

     Largely ignored, by gurus and governments, are the older, high-impact growth firms. Though they
     generate almost all of the innovation and job growth in economies, there are not enough of them
   to garner the favorable attention of politicians or book publishers. Verne and his team are focused
     on helping cities and countries create scaleup eco-systems to support the already robust startup
eco-systems that exist.

 Gazelles: High-Impact Firms
       In a study for the US Small Business Administration titled "High-Impact Firms: Gazelles Re-
 visited" (http://tiny.cc/high-impact-gazelles), the authors note: "High-impact firms are relatively
       old, rare and contribute to the majority of overall economic growth. On average, they are 25
   years old, they represent between 2 and 3 percent of all firms, and they account for almost all
 of the private sector employment and revenue growth in the economy."
     To underpin this "older" idea, we looked at the trajectory of two well-known gazelles: Apple
      and Starbucks. Apple, which started in 1976, had only 9,600 employees when it released the
    iPod in 2001, its 25th anniversary. The rest is history. All the phenomenal growth of Apple in
     revenue and employment (80,000 in 2013) occurred after this historic milestone, resulting in
the largest-market-cap company in the world at the time of this book's publication.
    Starbucks followed an almost identical growth path, launching in 1971 and taking the first 20
   years to perfect its business model and reach 100 locations. By its 25th anniversary, it was at
   1,000 stores and ventured outside the US for the first time. Since then, it has rocketed to more
 than 18,000 stores in 62 countries and more than 150,000 employees.
   To paraphrase Steve Jobs, "I'm always amazed how overnight successes take a helluva long time."
  If you've been in business less than 25 years, you still have time to make it big; if it has been
 more than 25 years, and you've not scaled up, it's never too late!


4

---

                                                            The Overview

                       Scaling Up
"How do we scale up the business?" is a question we've heard from countless leaders over the years,
    propting the name and focus of this book. "How to survive the process" with your sanity and
    relationships intact is the second question.

    Dumbest in the Room
  Senior leaders know they have succeeded in building an organization that can scale — and is fun
  to run — when they are the dumbest people in the room! In turn, if they have all the answers (or
 act like they do), it guarantees organizational silence, exacerbates blindness (the CEO is always
    the last to know anyway), and means the senior team ends up carrying the entire load of the
  company on their backs. The best leaders have the right questions, but turn to their employees,
     customers, advisors, and the crowd to mine the answers. Every business is more valuable to
   the degree that it does not depend on its top leader. For more on these topics, read Margaret
    Heffernan's book Willful Blindness: Why We Ignore the Obvious at Our Peril and Liz Wiseman's
    Multipliers: How the Best Leaders Make Everyone Smarter.


    To scale up a business from a handful of employees to something significant (i.e., build a company
    that has a chance to both put a "dent in the universe" and dominate its industry), our tools and
    techniques focus on three deliverables:

     Reduce by 80% the time it takes the top team to manage the business (operational activities)
     Refocus the senior team on market-facing activities
     Realign everyone else (onto the same page) to drive execution and results
    And when our tools are successfully implemented, organizations attain these four outcomes:
     At least double the rate of cash flow
     Triple the industry average profitability
     Increase the valuation of the firm relative to competitors
      Help the stakeholders — employees, customers, and shareholders — enjoy the climb
    Yet there are three barriers to scaling up, which we'll discuss in the next chapter:
     Leadership: the inability to staff/grow enough leaders throughout the organization who
     have the capabilities to delegate and predict
    Scalable infrastructure: the lack of systems and structures (physical and organizational)
     to handle the complexities in communication and decisions that come with growth
     Marketing: the failure to scaleup an effective marketing function capable of attracting
     new customers, talent, advisors, and other key relationships to the business

                                                                                              5

---

 Scaling Up

 Thus, to overcome these barriers your team must master, using our tools, four fundamentals:
  In leading People, take a page from parenting: Establish a handful of rules, repeat yourself
   a lot, and act consistently with those rules. This is the role and power of Core Values.
   If discovered and used effectively, these values guide all the relationship decisions and systems
   in the company.
  In setting Strategy, follow the definition from the great business strategist Gary Hamel.
   You don't have a real strategy if it doesn't pass two tests: First, what you're planning to do
   really matters to enough customers; and second, it differentiates you from your competition.
  In driving Execution, implement three key habits: Set a handful of Priorities (the fewer the
   better); gather quantitative and qualitative Data daily and review weekly to guide decisions;
   and establish an effective daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual meeting Rhythm to
   keep everyone in the loop. Those who pulse faster, grow faster.
  In managing Cash, don't run out of it! This means paying as much attention to how every
   decision affects cash flow as you would to revenue and profitability.

With these fundamentals in mind, you're ready to start climbing.

 Climbing Everest

 Scaling up a business is like climbing a mountain. To use a simple analogy, many people dream of
summiting Mount Everest (or its equivalent in their life). Those who do it create a plan. Prepared
with a set of inviolable rules and a passion for the journey, they head toward the summit. Along the
way, they aim for a series of camps: intermediate waypoints normally marking significant changes in
terrain. Then it's a matter of focusing on the next day and, more important, the first and subsequent
 steps, making adjustments along the way as the mountain conditions dictate. Those who have made
such personal journeys report that it's ultimately about staying acutely aware as you push to take
just one more calculated step.

      It's the same for an organization.
      Guided by a set of Core Values and                                BHAG
    a purpose, it chooses a Big Hairy Au-
      dacious Goal (BHAG)* to achieve in                        3-5years
     the next 10 to 25 years. To break up                       1 year
    the journey, the leadership team sets
   a series of three- to five-year targets  Next quarter
     divided up into annual goals. These
     are further broken down into specif-
    ic actionable steps the business takes
      over the next few weeks or months
    adjusting tactics as the market condi
tions dictate.
*BHAG is a registered trademark of Jim Collins and Jerry Porras.
6

---

                                                                             The Overview

In the end, it's about keeping everyone focused on the summit (BHAG®) and then deciding the
         aprit ext e qartrl Pririty) while respecing the rule that keep you from being wet
off the mountain (Values) — keeping in mind Bill Gates' note that "most people overestimate what
they can do in one year and underestimate what they can do in ten years."
Everything in between this quarter and the next 10 to 25 years is a WAG: a wild-ankle guess! There
 are no straiht nes in natureor business. As a windingriver must follow the contours of thelanscape
 on its way to the ocean, a business must navigate the undulations of the marketplace on the way to
its Everest. The key is keeping your eye on the prize and adjusting course accordingly.
And along the journey, there is a set of habits — routines — that will make the climb easier. "Routine
sets you free" is a key driving principle behind our methodologies and tools. You may set a goal to
lose weight, but unless you change some daily and weekly routines, it will   "Routine sets
never be accomplished. Goals without routines are wishes; routines without
goals are aimless. The most successful business leaders have a clear vision  you free."
and the disciplines (routines) to make it a reality.

Wasted Debate
   Nothing is more maddening than hearing teams debate whether a certain idea is applicable
  in a business-to-business or business-to-consumer engagement. In the end, we're all in the
  same business: people to people. None of us sell to companies; we deal with the people (con-
  sumers) inside these companies, who have the same motivations, challenges, and emotions as
any other person.
The other needless delineation is between product and service companies. In the long run, most
product companies add on services to increase profitability and most service companies produc-
 tize their offerings to make them easier to sell. We recommend that you avoid these debates,
and consider most of the examples in this book applicable to any organization in any industry.


                                            4D Framework
McKinsey has its 7-S Framework for large companies; we have our 4D Framework for growth firms.
 This framework evolved from the fundamentals, barriers, and goals described earlier and was based
on this quote attributed to Albert Einstein: "Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not
simpler." Scaling a business is a complex endeavor and requires robust — yet simple enough — tools
and techniques to get the job done.
The framework includes these elements (see diagram on Page 8)
Driver: Leaders drive implementation of the Rockefeller Habits with their teams.
 Execution is much easier if they and their teams engage in coaching, embrace learning,
 and encourage the use of new technologies to accelerate implementation of our tools.
                                                                                       7

---

                                                              Gazelles
                                                              GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES

Gazelles 4D Framework Getting to Results
A proven business growth method used by thousands of growing companies to achieve REsuLTS

  Driver (with Accelerators)
  Coaching - Advisors, Consultants, Coaches
  Learning - Continuous Business Education (CBE)
 Technology - Management Accountability System

 2 Demands (Balance)

   People (Reputation) - Employees, Customers, Shareholders
  Process (Productivity) - Make/Buy, Sell, Recordkeeping

 3 Disciplines (Routines)

  Priorities - The Main Thing
   Data - Qualitative/Quantitative
   Meeting Rhythms - Daily, Weekly, Monthly, Quarterly, Annual

  Decisions (Right Questions)
  People - Happiness/Accountability
  Strategy - Revenue/Growth
  Execution - Profit/Time
   Cash - Oxygen/Options


Results
2x Cash Flow • 3x Profitability • 10x Valuation • More Time!


Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

                                                                             The Overview

 2. Demands: Leaders have to balance two often competing demands on the business —
  People and Process. This requires simultaneously maintaining a great reputation with the
  employees, customers, and shareholders (the People side of the business); and improving
  the productivity of how the firm makes/buys, sells, and tracks these transactions (the Process
  side of the business).
 3. Disciplines: To effectively execute, there are three fundamental disciplines (routines):
  Set Priorities; gather quantitative and qualitative Data; and establish an effective
  meeting Rhythm. It's in these meetings, debating the data (the brutal facts!), where
  the priorities emerge.
 4.Decisions: Ultimately, all of the above require some decisions. To scale the business requires
  getting four key decision sets — People, Strategy, Execution, and Cash — absolutely right
  and there are right and wrong answers. Shortchange any one element and you're not maxi-
  mizing your opportunity.
  WARNING: Since Mastering the Rockefeller Habits was written, many bits and pieces
           of our 4D Framework and tools have been copied by others. In the process, several have over-
     simplified our work to the point that it might still be helpful — setting a few priorities and key
         performance indicators (KPIs) is better than nothing — but there is huge potential left on the
  table in terms of revenue and profit. "Simple, not simpler" is our aim, as Einstein warned

   In turn, we know that it takes a "village of gurus" to help a company and that no one person has all
     the answers. Therefore, we'll be referencing many important books and ideas that fill in important
 gaps around leadership, sales, marketing, hiring, etc.

 Right Questions

 Our last guiding principle in designing the 4D Framework:

  We have the answers, all the answers; it's the question we do not know.
 Most of the teams we work with are wicked smart. With enough perseverance and grit they'll find an-
swers. Our concern is they might be working on the wrong
  question. Much of our work is helping leadership teams        "We have the answers, all the
 formulate the right questions. Once they get the questions     answers; it's the question we
 right, the answers tend to appear.                             do not know."
 Each of the 4 Decisions — People, Strategy, Execution, and
 Cash — is anchored by an overarching Key Question. And the accompanying Growth Tools (our
 label for the collection of one-page worksheets summarized next) are designed to focus teams on
 specific questions driving growth and performance for each of the 4 Decisions areas of the business.

 So, to start implementing the 4D Framework, the first question is, "Which of the 4 Decisions — People,
Strategy, Execution, and Cash — needs the most attention next?" Start there! We have a complimentary
individual 4 Decisions Assessment available at scalingup.com to help you determine your starting point.
                                                                                                 9

---

Scaling Up

Our methodology and tools are like crossword or Sudoku puzzles. Start where you can and work your
way through. There is no specific sequence. However, we do have five initial "next steps" outlined
in the last chapter.
The following overview of each decision willfurther help you choose where to start in scaling up
the business.

                               People
   KEY QUESTION: Are the stakeholders (employees, customers, shareholders) happy and engaged
   in the business; and would you "rehire" all of them?
Do you have the "right people doing the right things right" inside  "Right people doing the
the organization?                                                   right things right."
Then you need to evaluate all the key relationships surrounding
the business. Would you keep all your existing customers? Are you
happy with your investors/bank? Are your vendors supporting you properly? Are your advisors —
accountants, lawyers, consultants, and coaches — the best for the size of the organization and future
plans? The toughest decisions to make are when the company has outgrown some of these relationships
and you need to make changes.
It starts with your own relationship goals and priorities, then being clear who are the leaders accountable
 for the main functions and processes that drive the business.
 The tools (three-quarter-size copies are included in the introduction to the "People" section):
 One-Page Personal Plan (OPPP): Our personal and profes-            People: n  P                Gazelles
sional lives are intertwined — and best if aligned. This tool
looks at four key decisions — Relationships, Achievements,          NENLCOSNAKNS
 Rituals, and Wealth — which mirror the four key decisions for
 the business: People, Strategy, Execution, and Cash. Having a
 strong and fulflled personal life provides an important foun-
 dation for sustaining your efforts in the business.
 Function Accountability Chart (FACe): Jim Collins, author
 of Good to Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap.. And
 Others Don't, emphasizes the importance of getting the right
 butts in the right seats at the top of the organization. After all,
                              the bottleneck is always at
 "The bottleneck is always     the top of the bottle! The
 at the top of the bottle!"    FACe tool provides a list
                             of seats (functions) that all
                               organizations must fill
 10

---

                                                                                      The Overview

People:Fu                                     Gazelles     You want to delegate these functions to people who fit your
 Ne                                                        culture and pass two tests:
 Ak P tou questons at the bott of the page e w
  They don't need to be managed.

                                                           2.They regularly wow the team with their insights
                                                           and output.
                                                              Next designate one or two key performance indicators (KPIs)
 Sachrongy                                                    for each function, defining objectively what activities each
                                                           senior leader needs to be focused on day-to-day. Last, decide
                                                             on a handful of results/outcomes accountable to each function
                                                           (i.e., who is accountable for revenue, gross margin, profit, cash,
                                                               etc.). These outcomes normally represent line items on the
                                                           financial statements.

                                                           When completed, this one-page accountability tool helps you
diagnose where you have people and performance gaps on the leadership team.

Process Accountability Chart (PACe): Most work flows hori-                                                  Gazelles
zontally across the various functions. Functions are not isolated                     kdendly 4 to 9 processes that dive your buainet
cells. When these functions aren't working well together, the
firm can stall.                                                                       WSKNR

This chart provides a place to delineate the four to nine process-
es that drive the business (i.e., the processes for developing and
launching a new product; for attracting, hiring, and onboarding
new employees; for billing and collecting, etc.).

Next, designate who is accountable for each process, which
can be tricky since these processes cut across various func-
tions and there might be some ego/control issues between the
functional heads.

Last, decide on two or three KPIs that track the health of the
process - the most important being the length of time, from start to finish, for a specific process.
We'll discuss how a variety of organizations are utilizing the principles of Lean, a management practice
invented by Toyota, to streamline and speed up their processes.
The Team" and "The Managers" chapters: There's a continual war for talent. We'll share guerilla
marketing techniques for attracting a large number of qualified candidates and review the Topgrading
methodology for interviewing and selection.

In retaining employees and keeping them engaged, we'll cover the five activities of great (vs. good)
managers (we prefer the term "coaches" — more on this later):

                                                                                                                                     11

---

Scaling Up

  Help people play to their strengths.
  Don't demotivate; dehassle.
 Set clear expectations and give employees a clear line of sight.
 Give recognition and show appreciation.
 Hire fewer people, but pay them more (frontline employees, not top leaders!).

                                       Strategy
  KEY QUESTION: Can you state your firm's strategy simply — and is it driving sustainable growth
  in revenue and gross margins?

It's time to break apart a 50-year-old business term — strategic planning — and think about it in terms
of two distinct activities: strategic thinking and execution planning. Each requires two very different
teams and processes.

       Think                                                         Strategic thinking requires a handful of senior leaders meeting
                                                                      weekly (it's not sufficient to do strategy work once a quarter
                                                                     or once a year) in what Jim Collins calls "the council." It's a
                                                                        meeting separate from the standard executive team meeting.
Learn                      Plan                                       Rather than getting mired in operational issues, the strategic
                                thinking team is focused on discussing a few big strategic
                                                                      issues including those outlined in the SWT and 7 Strata tools
                                summarized below.

          Act                   Execution planning, in turn, requires a much larger team en-
                                gaged in implementing the broader strategy. Setting specific
annual and quarterly priorities, outcomes, and KPIs is best if middle management and frontline
employees are involved. They are closer to the day-to-day                Strategy: Vision Summar    Gazelles
operational issues of the company, and their participation in            CORE VALUES                PURPOSE  BRAND PROMISES
setting the plan creates better buy-in.

Add in both disciplined action and active learning activities and you
have a simple Think, Plan, Act, Learn cycle of strategic planning.                                  BHAG

The tools (three-quarter-size copies are included in the introduction    STRATECI                            PRTORTICO
                                                                         3-5y                       1m       Qtr
to the "Strategy" section):

  Vision Summary: For companies just getting started imple-
menting the Rockefeller Habits as well as firms with 50 em-
ployees or fewer, the Vision Summary provides a simplified
One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP) framework. And for larger
firms taking advantage of the more detailed aspects of the
    OPSP, the Vision Summary provides a one-page format to

12

---

                                                                                    The Overview

 communicate key aspects of the company's vision to employees,     Strategy: Strengths. Veaknesses, Trends (SW) Worshoet Gazelles
customers, investors, and the broader community.                   Trends           on markets, coreumer, and social trends

         SWT: We've augmented the standard SWOT (strengths, weak-
      neses, opportunities, and threats) process with a tool called
the SWT (strengths, weaknesses, and trends).

        Whereas the SWOT process drives leaders to look inward at  Strengths/Core Competencles Weaknesses                of the organeaition
                                                                                               ta aren't Boy to change?
       both their company and industry challenges, the SWT focuses
      on exploring broader external trends beyond their own industry
     or geography. It's a powerful tool to spot opportunities before
 the competition and prevent "inside/industry myopia.

      The 7 Strata of Strategy: This tool represents the seven com-
     ponents (stratum) of a robust, yet simply stated, strategy. It's
    designed to provide the kind of differentiation and barriers that
 allow you to dominate your niche in the marketplace.
 The seven components:                                            Strategy: 7 Strata
 What word(s) do you own in the minds of your targeted
  customers (e.g., Google owns "search")?
  2.Who are your core customers, what three Brand Promises                                                               K
   are you making them (e.g., Southwest Airlines promises
    Low Fares, Lots of Flights, Lots of Fun), and how do
   you know you're keeping these promises (Kept Promise            Brand Promise Quarantee (Catalytic Mechanlsm):
   Indicators, a play on KPIs)?                                    One-PHRAsE Strategy (Key to Maling Money
  3. What is your Brand Promise Guarantee (e.g., Oracle
    has been advertising the chance to win $10 million if
    its Exadata servers don't outperform the competition           Factor ny
    by a factor of five)?                                                                                        BHAG* (10 - 25 Year Goal
         What is your One-PHRASE Strategy that likely upsets                                                     WHaG feganTadat C anday Pa
    customers (Apple's "closed system") but is key to making
    a ton of money and blocking your competition?
  5. What are the three to five Activities that fit Harvard strategist Michael Porter's
    definition of the essence of differentiation (e.g., IKEA's furniture needs assembly)
  6. What is your X-Factor — a 10 times to 100 times underlying advantage over the
   competition — that completely wipes out any and all rivals?
  7. What are your Profit per X (economic driver) and BHAG® for the company?
  These come straight from Jim Collins.

    One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP): If you want everyone on the same page, then you need this page
    first. The OPSP is our best-known and most widely used tool. It's designed to drive alignment,
accountability, and focus.

                                                                                                                                         13

---

    Scaling Up

    Strategy: One-Page Strategic Pan (OPSP Orgawre                                                   Gazelles
              Employees    People Reputation Orvers)    Sharsholders               Process Productivity Drvers    Recordkreping
                           Customera                                                Make/Buy    Sa

              RE VALUES/DELIEFS  PURPSE SE  TARGETS (3-6 YRS.)     GOALS (1 YRU)    ACTIONS QOTRO    THEME  YOUR ACCOUNTABILUTY
              (Shuds Shudn'                 Future Duta                             O                       War Ki             Cacaw

                                                                                            Thome Name

                                                                   Kry bi aches         Scorebeard Dassign






    BA0*    Reward  : 7 1



                                               Cayyy 21s Candtis, t

                                         The body of the plan consists of seven columns organized
    "If you want everyone on       around seven basic questions you need to answer if you want to
    the same page, then you           accomplish anything: Who, What, When, Where, How, Why, plus
    need this page first."          Should/Shouldn't. We've aligned these with standard strategic
                                  planning language like Core Values, Purpose, Annual Priorities,
                              etc. - but anchor the plan in these simpler questions.

The first three columns of the OPSP represent the strategic thinking part of the plan supported by
the work done on the 7 Strata; the last four columns represent the execution planning part of the
  plan. The OPSP has space along the bottom to summarize your SWT and along the top to list the
    key metrics monitoring your reputation (People) and productivity (Process).

                              Execution

      KEY QUESTION: Are all processes running without drama and driving industry-leading
    profitability?

    You know you have execution issues if three things exist:
    1.There is needless drama in the organization (e.g., something shipped out late; the invoice
    was wrong; someone missed a meeting; etc.).
    2. Everyone seems to be working more hours, spinning           "Is the company generating
    his wheels, or spending too much time fixing things
    that should have been done right the first time.               three times industry average
    3. Most important, the company is generating less than         profitability?"
    three times industry average profitability

    14

---

                                                                    The Overview

   WARNING: Companies can get by with sloppy execution if they have a killer strategy or highly ded-
  icated people willing to work 18-hour days, eight days per week to cover up all the slop. Just recognize
  y'oy   csh pe e
The tools (three-quarter-size copies are included in the introduction to the "Execution"sion):
          Who, What, When (WWW): Improve the impact of your         Execution: Who What · When (WW)    Gazelles
weekly meetings by taking a few minutes at the end and sum-
marizing Who said they are going to do What, When. This isn't
about micromanagement; this is about excellent management
and being clear in both communication and accountability.
The key is setting a "when" that is no longer than the time
between weekly (or monthly) meetings. And if you have a
more substantial initiative, the key is breaking it into pieces
(eat the elephant one bite at a time) that can be accomplished
within a few weeks.
Rockefeller Habits Checklist™: There are 10 fundamental hab-
its that support the successful execution of your strategy — habits
that haven't changed for 100 years since John D. Rockefeller
implemented them, becoming the wealthiest person ever and
building what has morphed into one of the largest companies
today: ExxonMobil.                                                  Execution: Rockefeller Habits Checklist    Gazelles
   These habits dramatically increase profitability and reduce the
    time it takes to manage the business. And like the checklists
that are critical to the airline industry in making sure planes
stay in the air, consider these 10 habits as a "preflight" checklist
for keeping your company growing and ensuring that it doesn't
stall out.
   WARNING: You'll drive everyone in the organization crazy
       if you implement all of these habits at one time. The key is
       focusing on one or two each quarter, giving everyone roughly
   24 to 36 months to install these simple, yet powerful, routines.
     Then it's a process of continually refreshing them as the com-
   pany scales up.
The habits ("Routines that set you free!"):
The executive team is bealthy and aligned. Here we pull a page from Patrick M. Lencioni's
  The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership Fable, a book we recommend that all leaders
 peruse (it's a quick read). In essence, your executive team needs to have a level of trust that
 permits true debate and constructive conflict to occur. What prevents this in large companies
                                                                                                               15

---

Scaling Up

        is politics; what blocks it in growth firms is friendship. Members of the team must embrace
      its diversity (the more the better) and be willing to challenge each other in making decisions
        and exposing the brutal facts.

   2. Everyone is aligned with the #1 thing that needs to be accomplished this quarter to move the
       company forward. As mentioned earlier, scaling a firm is about taking one significant step at
       a time and then checking data and adjusting accordingly. It is about setting a quarterly goal
        providing the company with a badly needed finish line every 90 days, vs. just running and
       running and running. It also affords everyone an opportunity to celebrate or commiserate —
        and have some fun along the way. This is the power of setting a Quarterly Theme, which
        we'll discuss in depth later.

   3. Communication rhythm is established and information moves through the organization
      accurately and quickly. The #1 challenge when two or more people are working together is
       communication (anyone married?). The key is an effective daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly,
      and annual Meeting Rhythm, which, when executed properly, actually saves everyone a tre-
      mendous amount of time. It's counterintuitive, we know. Specific agendas for each meeting
      will be detailed in the "Execution" section.

   4.Every facet of the organization has a person assigned with accountability for ensuring goals are
     met. If communication is the #1 challenge, then nailing down accountabilities as the com-
       pany scales is #2. This needs to be clear both vertically (across functions) and horizontally
      (across processes) throughout the organization. And it really gets messy when the organiza-
       tion moves to discrete business units.

  5.Ongoing employee input is collected to identify obstacles and opportunities. A key component
     of the weekly qualitative data you need to guide the business must come from your
     employees, especially your sales channels and your frontline employees. They are closer
     to the action. We recommend that each senior leader formally talk to one employee each
    week and ask, "What should the company Start/Stop/Keep doing?" Pay particular atten-
    tion to the "stops."These are the roadblocks you need to eliminate from the company to
     keep people motivated.

  6. Reporting and analysis of customer feedback data is as frequent and accurate as financial data.
     The second key component of the weekly qualitative data that you need to guide the busi-
     ness must come from customers. We suggest that each senior leader formally ask customers
      questions that are more about gathering market intel, especially about competitors, than
     discerning whether they like your particular product or service.
7. Core Values and Purpose are "alive"in the organization. These are the handful of rules (Core
    Values) that you'll use to guide all the HR systems in the company: hiring, feedback,
    rewards and recognition, handbook, etc. And the Purpose (a better word than "mission")
    provides the critical "why" behind everything you do (i.e., what difference is your company
     making in the world?).

16

---

                                                                           The Overview
  8Employees can articulate the following key components of the company's strategy accurately. You
   w  ye  s wi e y  th pany  th y
   need to know and understand the company's 10- to 25-year goal (BHAG®); who the core

   does — and be able to explain it when asked (the elevator pitch).
  9All employees can answer quantitatively whether they had a good day or week (Column 7 of the
   OPSP). Is each employee or team clear on their priorities and KPIs for the week? And do
   they know how they did that week? People love to know the score; thus the attraction of
   video games, sports, fundraisers, competitions, etc.
  The company's plans and performance are visible to everyone. We're not big on sports analo-
    gies, but we strongly suggest stealing one idea from that industry: having huge scoreboards
    visible to everyone. We'll share examples and photos of growth firms that do.

                                 Cash
   KEY QUESTION: Do you have consistent sources of cash, ideally generated internally, to fuel the
   growth of your business?
      Growth sucks cash. This is the first law of entrepre-
      neurial gravity. And nothing ages a CEO and his or her  "Growth sucks cash — the first
    team faster than being short of cash. In fact, Jim Collins  law of entrepreneurial gravity."
 and Morten T. Hansen, in their best-selling book Great
 by Choice: Uncertainty, Chaos, and Luck — Why Some
     Thrive Despite Them All, found that successful companies held three to 10 times more cash assets than
      average for their industries, and they did so from the time they started. (We highly recommend that
 you read this book, Collins' first that directly addresses growth firms.)
         Yet many growth company leaders pay more attention to revenue and profit than they do to cash
        when it comes to structuring deals with suppliers, customers, employees (think bonus plans), or
       investors/banks. And when they receive their monthly financial statements, the cash flow statement
is either nonexistent or ignored.
       The quickest action you can take is to have your CFO give you a modified cash flow statement every
     day detailing the cash that came in during the last 24 hours, the cash that flowed out, and some idea
of how cash is looking over the next 30 to 90 days. This will keep cash top-of-mind and give you a
great feel for how cash is flowing through the business.
       It's also critical to know your Cash Conversion Cycle (CCC). It's a technical term for how long it
    takes, after you spend a dollar/euro/yen on rent, utilities, payroll, inventory, marketing, etc., for it
       to make its way through your business model and back into your pocket. So that you can see how to
     calculate this, we recommend that you read a classic Harvard Business Review article titled "How Fast
Can Your Company Afford to Grow?" by Neil C. Churchill and John W. Mullins.

                                                                                                17

---

   Scaling Up

   The tools (three-quarter-size copies are included in the introduction to the "Cash" section):
   The Power of One: The 7 main financial levers available to managers to improve cash and returns
   in the business are:
     1.Price: You can increase the price of your goods          Cash: The Power of One             Gazelles
     and services.                                              Your Power of One                  Not Cash Flow  EDIT $
     2.Volume: You can sell more units at the same price.                                       M
     3.Cost of goods sold/direct costs: You can reduce the      Your Power of One                  Aa h owo       react on n
                                                                Pice hosase %
     price you pay for your raw materials and direct labor.     Wtre romo %
                                                                COGS Redution %
     4.Operating expenses: You can reduce your                  Ovahecds Recduction *
                                                                Reduction n Debtors Days     day/s)
     operating costs.                                           Poducfon n SokDas            d
                                                                Stors Days                   doyt
    5.Accounts receivable: You can collect from your            Your Power of One Imp
     debtors faster.
     6Inventory/WIP (work in progress): You can reduce          Your Powor of Oone
     the amount of stock you have on hand.
    7Accounts payable: You can slow down the payment
     of creditors.
  The tool calculates the benefit to cash if a 1% or one-day change is made to each of these levers.
  Cash Acceleration Strategies (CASh) - Break down the                                                            Gazelles
 CCC into four components, and brainstorm one of three
 ways to increase the cash flow in the business. We've had
 many clients double their operating cash flow immediately
 after working through this tool. It's also a great exercise to
 do with middle managers, to strengthen their understanding
 of how cash flows through the organization and to illustrate
how everyone can make a positive contribution to improving
 the CCC.

 The goal is to reverse the first law of entrepreneurial gravity
 and develop a viable business model in which the faster you
grow, the more cash you generate — through larger deposits,
faster collections, shorter sales and delivery cycles, etc. Then
you've built a company that can self-fund its own growth.





18

---

                                                                                   The Overview

                                Final Recommendations
    Downloadable documents of the various tools, in multiple languages, are available at scalingup.com
    at no charge. Feel free to modify them and to suggest changes. They remain an open-source set of
    tools, and they are constantly being improved by the community of growth company executives
   using them.

    Weekly Insights: Sign Up!
   If you like the style and substance of the book, you can receive a very concise weekly email of best
   practices for managing a growing firm: ideas we pick up each week from executives like you.
        Simply send an email to vharnish@gazelles.com and put "weekly insights" in the subject line. And
       please include a first and last name and your title, and tell us where your company is based. We'l
    add you to our expanding list of more than 60,000 leaders of growing companies.

    Technology and Coaching Support
   We've created several cloud-based tools to make implementation of the Rockefeller Habits 2.0 much
    easier and faster. The first is an online version of Verne's 2.5-day Scaling Up course providing a con-
         venient way to educate your team and create a common language around our tools and techniques.
  Visit www.growthinstitute.com.
          We've also created Alignwithgazelles.com, an online and mobile-based app that hosts our one-
       page tools and helps you track all your cascading KPIs and Priorities in one easy location. Visit
  www.alignwithgazelles.com for more information and to start your trial today.
      We also have certified coaching partners around the globe that can support you locally in implement-
        ing the Rockefeller Habits 2.0. No one has ever achieved peak performance without a coach. Visit
 www.gicoaches.com to locate a coach near you.

  Relax With the Process
                     Non  thi is cplicat exctrategy): Ijus reuie sme isipline n erean. Tre
      our tools as you would Sudoku or crossword puzzles. Fill in what you know as you go. Again, it's not
      necessary to work through the tools in any kind of sequence. Start where it makes the most sense for
 your organization. "Get it down; then get it right" is one of our mottos.  "Get it down;
 The key is lots of iterations: reviewing and updating our Growth Tools     then get it right."
every quarter. Routine will set you free.
The rest of this book provides the practical how-to details behind our recommended processes and
tools. Enjoy, and best of luck as you scale your business — and let us know how we can help


19

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

 2
THE BARRIERS
Leadership, Infrastructure,
and Marketing


   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: There are predictable evolutions and revolutions as an organization grows
   These are dictated by the increasing complexity that comes with adding employees, customers, product lines,
  locations, etc. Handling a company's growth successfully requires three things: an increasing number of capable
  leaders; a scalable infrastructure; and an effective marketing function. If these factors are missing, you will
  face barriers to growth. Scaling up successfully requires leaders who possess aptitudes for prediction, delegation,
   and repetition.
   I'm tired of sailing my little boat
   Far inside of the harbor bar;
  I want to be out where the big ships float —
  Out on the deep where the Great Ones are! ..
   And should my frail craft prove too slight
   For storms that sweep those wide seas o'er
   Better go down in the stirring fight
   Than drowse to death by the sheltered shore!
   — Daisy Rinehart

                           ack in 1999, Alan Rudy was a disillusioned CEO. "Wasn't I supposed to be making more money
   B
                             and having more fun, the bigger the company got?" wondered the founder of Express-Med, a
   mail-order medical supplies firm based in Ohio. "I was angry all of the time," remembers Rudy. "I had
   a long weekend planned to go skiing with my father and two brothers for the first time in 10 years, yet
   I bagged out at the last minute because the business needed me to hold things together."
   To make matters worse, on March 30 of that year, Rudy's CFO showed him financials that estimated
   a first-quarter profit of $300,000, yet two days later, his CFO said that they had actually lost $350,000.
              "For several hours, I thought it was an elaborate April Fools' joke," he chuckles today. "I kept trying
   to be a good sport about it, yet it turned out to be true." Turmoil among his staffers capped it off
   Associates had fistfights in the parking lot, and one employee slashed the tires of another because
   of something said at work. The endless firefighting meant Rudy was putting in 80-hour workweeks.
   Needless to say, "stress was a little high," says Rudy.


  21

---

 Scaling Up

 Yet within two years, Rudy had reversed the trends, addressing the barriers we'll outline in this
 chapter. Utilizing the tools and techniques you'll learn in this book, he scaled up his 7-year-old firm
   into a $65 million industry leader. More important, he says, "It was fun again, and we were making
   money." Rudy went on to sell the company for $40 million, completing his own entrepreneurial life
 cycle: start, scale, sell.
    Drawing on the lessons he learned in scaling up Express-Med, Rudy launched an investment firm to
  unlock the growth and profitability of additional companies. Incubating multiple firms amplified the
 importance of getting the right people into leadership positions. Because Rudy is a driven leader who
   "can take over a huddle and tell everyone what to do," he had to make himself "push accountability
 down," so everyone at each company had a stake in helping the business to excel.
    Besides mastering these leadership and delegation challenges, Rudy learned a crucial lesson from
 the marketplace: You have to get your strategy right. This is what he calls finding the "ping" in the
  business. (Imagine the sound of flicking a plastic cup, representing a weak strategy, vs. flicking a
 fine crystal goblet, indicative of a clear one.) Great execution won't get you anywhere if your strat-
    egy is wrong. Understanding this has paid off handsomely for Rudy at several of his investments,
including Perceptionist.

Perceptionist's "Ping"
  Perceptionist started out as a call center, answering the phones for companies in 60 to 70 different
   industries. To uncover the Ohio-based firm's growth potential, Rudy spent three months on the road
    visiting customers. (CEO Lou Gerstner had the senior managers at IBM do something similar in an
     initiative code-named "Operation Bear Hug.") One of Perceptionist's clients began grousing about
 paying monthly rates equivalent to about $1 per minute to have calls answered, especially for misdials.
     Moreover, the customer waxed indignant about the problems of playing phone tag with clients who
just wanted to make an appointment. In his frustration, the customer exclaimed to Rudy, "Forget the
buck per minute; I'd pay you $25 to take over my calendar and book appointments!"
     A light bulb went on. Rudy sold off accounts that needed only answering services (including ours
     at Gazelles!) and shifted the company's direction to booking appointments for its clients. While
     everyone else in the industry was focused on achieving a certain profit per minute, Rudy focused
      on attaining a targeted profit per booked appointment. This turned around a situation in which
  Perceptionist had been struggling to compete with overseas rivals with rates equivalent to 50 cents a
     minute. Focusing on this new metric and a handful of targeted industries — core customers — that
needed appointments booked (plumbing, HVAC, and maid service firms) helped the company bring
in revenue averaging $5 a minute. This was more than four times the industry average.
      In addition, complexity decreased. "Training costs went way down, since our new reps went from
 needing to learn the language of 60 different industries to [mastering] just a few," says Rudy. "In the
    past, we often could not take on a new customer because we did not have trained personnel," a huge
People problem in scaling the business.

22

---

                                                                          The Barriers

R
welMeanwhile, he tripled the value hi invesment i the firm.

Grow Where You're Planted
Rudy has achieved some of his greatest successes with firms when following the old adage, "Grow
  where you're planted." In other words, stick to the businesses and markets you know best. For Rudy,
             thapprc shortens the learnig curv  enteing a new dustry allowinghim o bettvr-
                                                     n
     apets of each new business. For more on this key point from the founders of Pizza Hut, Boston
 Chicken, Celestial Seasonings, and California Closets, read this Fortune article by Verne: http://tiny
cc/worth-repeating.)
    In Rudy's case, growing where he was planted meant focusing on the medical supplies and pharma-
   ceutical industries. In 2003, when he bought a minority stake in MemberHealth, a pharmacy benefits
    management company that helps seniors get discounts on prescription drugs, it was bringing in $7
     million in revenue. Rudy helped the 18-person team implement the Rockefeller Habits, coaching
     MemberHealth's founder Chuck Hallberg. At Rudy's suggestion, the company dived into the first
   habit, holding a daily huddle at 7:30 a.m. to keep everyone focused on execution. Eventually, Rudy
    took on the role of chairman, while Hallberg remained CEO. The company rocketed to $1.2 billion
   in revenue by 2006, when the duo sold it to Universal American Financial, a Nasdaq-traded company,
for $630 million. It is now a division of CVS -— a really big ship.
   And Rudy is at it again. In March 2013, he formed Sleep Health Supplies, which took over a failing
    firm. He's CEO and majority shareholder of the business, now known as Good Night Medical. Using
   disciplines like the daily huddle to stay focused on key metrics, his team has achieved double the
orders per year and has kept patients for twice as long as most competitors. Building strong, recurring
   relationships with customers has enabled Rudy to negotiate a cost of goods from manufacturers that
is about 30% lower than his rivals'. All told, he estimates that the value of the firm's customers gives
Good Night Medical about a 10x competitive advantage over other players in the field.
As a serial entrepreneur and investor, Rudy has experienced firsthand the importance of getting
   the right People in place and learning how to delegate; the power of a focused Strategy to reduce
     complexity and drive industry-leading performance; and the importance of bringing disciplined
 Execution to all these ventures through habits like the daily huddle. (He's a big fan, if you haven't
     already guessed.) And he's both invested and made significant Cash — while continuing to learn
what is required to make the ride enjoyable along the way.

                          The Growth Paradox — an Anchor, or Wind at Your Back
   Like Rudy, who continues to go out beyond the harbor bar, you will find that leading a growth com-
   pany is one of the more exhilarating things you can do in the world. And eventually sailing among
the "big ships" can be an incredibly fulfilling and rewarding opportunity.
                                                                                     23

---

 Scaling Up

  Jack Harrington's Big Boat Experience
      Raytheon acquired Virtual Technology Corporation (VTC) in 2006, and within 30 days, Jack
    Harrington, VTC's co-founder and CEO, was asked to run a $750 million, 2,000-person Raytheon
     division specializing in command, control, communications, computers, and intelligence (or
   C4I, in defense industry terms). Admittedly, this was a daunting move for the growth-oriented
      CEO, who was used to running the much smaller $30 million company. "I immediately called
   Verne and said, 'Holy cow, Batman, I've got a $750 million business," he recalls. "He told me
  that I had all the skills and talent I needed and that I could do it. And in my heart, I wanted
                                           I lk w I r   p
                         ar busis. I miatey rouh  h Rockefele Habiari h hem
                             hules,an then quartrytrategi planig meetigs using he O-age Stratgi an.
  It was relycibl cs uret rathikigan de."
       Harrington was next asked tolead an even larger organization, ThalesRaytheonSystems, a joint
           venture equally owned by Raytheon Company and France-based Thales S.A. He notes that the
  same habits and meeting rhythms were responsible for creating a more collaborative culture across
         the French and American operations. Plus, the organization became much more aligned around
                                                                                          shWha vnp
                                                                                                 l
  tremendous, because you're not just getting together to discuss operations. You're discussing
  sa r  h .

 Yet for many business leaders, scaling the business is a nightmare. Does every employee you hire
   every customer you acquire, and every expansion you drive actually make you tired? Are you work-
   ing longer hours, although you'd thought there should be some economies of scale as the business
 grew? Does it feel like everyone is just piling onto an increasingly heavier anchor that you alone

 scale, so what happened?
 You're experiencing the growth paradox: the belief that as you scale the company — and increase
youe ta, psn —hi oul sut ey 'Thily
 get harder and more complicated.
Yet Harrington's experience in scaling VTC to $30 million and leading a growing 2,000-person divi-
  sion at Raytheon demonstrates that the techniques you're learning in this book do scale — and that
             they are applicable t someothe rgest companrod the lobe  theyare to row rs.
So why do only a fraction of companies actually scale up, while others fail to scale? How do you
counter the growth paradox? What did Harrington have to master at VTC that was transferable to
his Raytheon experience?
In short, he had to conquer complexity (and so do you!).

24

---

                                                                                 The Barriers

Complexity
Think back to when your company was just the founder and an assistant with a plan on the back of a
napkin. This start-up situation represents two channels of communication (degrees of complexity),
and anyone in a relationship knows that is hard enough. Add a third person (or customer or location or
pruct), and the degree of complexity triples from two to s.Add a fourth, and i quadruples to 24.
Expanding from three to four people
grows the team only 33%, yet complexity
may increase 400%. And the complexity
just keeps growing exponentially. It's why
many business owners often long for the
day when the company was just them and
an assistant selling a single service.
This complexity generates three funda-    2                  6                   24
mental barriers to scaling up a venture:
 Leadership: the inability to staffgrow enough leaders throughout the organization who
 have the capabilities to delegate and predict
 Scalable infrastructure: the lack of systems and structures (physical and organizational)
 to handle the complexities in communication and decisions that come with growth
 Marketing: the failure to scaleup an effective marketing function to both attract new
 relationships (customers, talent, etc.) to the business and address the increased competitive
 pressures (and eroded margins) as you scale
When you remove these barriers, then that anchor you've been dragging turns into wind at your back.
You can get your boat sailing ever faster. You can better navigate through the "Valleys of Death" —
those points in the company's growth where you're bigger, but not quite big enough to have the next
level of talent and systems needed to scale the venture. These are points where the business needs
to leap from one whitecap to the next or risk falling into an abyss (see figure).

28 Million Firms                                              There are roughly 28 million firms in
                                          > $50 million         the US, of which only 4% ever reach
                                          17,000             more than $1 million in revenue. Of
                                                             those firms, only about one out of 10,
                    > $10 million                            or 0.4% of all companies, ever make
                    0.4%                  Valley of Death    it to $10 million in revenue, and only
          > $1 million                                            17,000 companies surpass $50 mil-
          4%                                                  lion. Finishing out the list, the top
 < $1 million                         Valley of Death        2,500 firms in the US are larger than
     96%                                                       $500 million, and the top 500 public
          Valley of Death                                      and private firms exceed $5 billion.
                                                               Data indicate that there are similar
 Valley of Death                                             ratios in other countries.

                                                                                          25

---

Scaling Up

     What defines the hills and valleys is related more to the number of employees than to revenue, since
this is what drives the complexity equation mentioned above. If you figure roughly $100,000 revenue/
     employee for small firms and $250,000 revenue/employee for larger firms (yes, larger firms are more
  efficient on average); and you figure that one can lead seven to 10 others, you get some natural clusters
  One to three employees (the majority of home-based businesses)
  Eight to 12 employees (a very efficient company with a leader and a bunch of helpers)
  40 to 70 employees (a senior team of five to seven people, leading teams of seven to 10 —
  in a company where you still know everyone's name)
  350 to 500 employees (seven leaders, with seven middle managers each, running teams of
  seven to 10 — actually a very efficient company)
  2,500 to 3,500 employees (more multiples of seven to 10)
       Any company with an employee count between these natural clusters is likely feeling a bit stuck.
        Everything seems to take longer to complete. Problems you thought you had solved earlier start
        creeping up again. And you're feeling this "big, but not big enough" syndrome — even in making
minor decisions like what size photocopy machine you need next.
     As an organization follows this growth path, it goes through a predictable series of evolutions and
       revolutions. For more on these natural cycles, read professor Larry E. Greiner's classic Harvard
      Business Review article titled "Evolution and Revolution as Organizations Grow," from July-August
1972 (updated in May 1998).

 Scott Tannas and His Valleys of Death
          In 2011, Western Financial Group (WFG) — an Alberta-based financial services company with
           more than 2,000 employees — was acquired by Quebec-based Desjardins Group in a $440 mil-
        lion transaction. In the 15 years between WFG's IPO in 1996 and its return to being privately
         owned, the company's stock price rose 1,038%. Founder and Vice Chairman Scott Tannas remains
         committed to growing the company, and regularly shares with other entrepreneurs his insights
         on how to handle growth. "Verne talks about the Valleys of Death in how companies grow, and
 for those of us who have grown a big business, it's true," he says.
            Drawing from his own experience scaling WFG during 20 years as CEO, Tannas shares that
           when a company grows from two to 10 employees, it arrives at a "Valley of Death" because
                        p have ang.You' ne hire assantmanagr. "You can run te busness
      all by yourself, so you need to change the way you run it, and some guys can't get over it," says
        Tannas. After 25 employees, you face another set of challenges. For example, you need to hire
 someone to control money. At around 100 employees, "you need internal communications pro-
         cesses because you can't have a single staff meeting anymore," Tannas says. Company politics
        also come into play. "You have employees who think they know more than others," he notes. "All
       these different challenges come at different stages of growth that require you to change things.

26

---

                                                                                  The Barriers

   If you don't, then you will either fall backward or you're doomed to stay a company of that size."
       Hoping to tap into some of his business experience to grow the economy of his own country,
 Tannas became a senator in the Parliament of Canada in 2013.

  The three barriers to leadership, infrastructure, and marketing that can prevent firms from dealing
     with complexity are obstacles that Rudy, Harrington, and Tannas negotiated when growing their
companies. Let's examine each barrier in more detail.

 Leadership: Prediction, Delegation, and Repetition
   As goes the leadership team, so goes the rest of the company. Whatever challenges exist within the
  organization can be traced to the cohesion of the executive team and its capabilities in prediction,
 delegation, and repetition.

 Prediction
Leaders don't have to be years ahead, just minutes ahead of the market, the competition, and those
 they lead. The key is frequent interaction with customers, competitors, and employees.
   This is much easier when the company is small and the leadership team (or lonely entrepreneur) is
    personally handling al the sales, programming the software, and delivering the company's prouct
   and services directly. This becomes increasingly more difficult as the business scales up. Senior
   leaders become further isolated from customers and frontline employees, losing their gut feel for
 the business and the marketplace.
   This is why Rudy spent three months on the road visiting Perceptionist's customers, discovering a
  new business model that tripled the value of his investment. In "The Data" chapter, we'll delineate
 specific routines, along with tips on harnessing the power of big data, to help leaders improve their
 ability to "see around corners" in the marketplace. Ultimately, our tools and techniques will free the
senior team so they can spend 80% of the week engaged in market-facing activities.

Delegation
Letting go and trusting others to do things well is one of the more challenging aspects of being a
leader of a growing organization.
Most entrepreneurs prefer to operate alone. This is why most companies have just a handful of em-
    ployees. We often exclaim (tongue in cheek) that many business owners would love their companies
   even more if they didn't have to deal with employees or customers! It's the idea — the dream — of
 their business that they love the most.
                                                                                       27

---

Scaling Up

      To get to 10 employees, founders must delegate activities in which they are weak. To get to 50 em-
    ployees, they have to delegate functions in which they are strong! In many cases, the strength of the
       top leader becomes the weakness of the organization. For example, if the founder is the CEO and
    the main sales driver, either everyone ignores the big picture or revenue stalls. The leader needs to
delegate one of these two functions if the company is to continue to scale up.
        From 50 employees on up, the senior leaders must develop additional leaders throughout the or-
       ganization who share the same values, passion, and knowledge of the business. This way they have
enough talent to whom they can delegate the myriad number of activities and transactions necessary
to grow the business.
      Most MBA programs don't offer a single course or even a lecture on how to delegate, yet it is one
      of the most important skills a leader must develop. And many leaders confuse delegation with abdi-
       cation. Abdication is blindly handing over a task to someone with no formal feedback mechanism.
   This is OK if it is not mission-critical, but all systems need a feedback loop, or they eventually drift
out of control.
Successful delegation requires four components, assuming you have delegated a job to the right
person or team:
  1. Pinpoint what the person or team needs to accomplish (Priorities — One-Page Strategic Plan).
  2. Create a measurement system for monitoring progress (Data — qualitative and quantitative
   key performance indicators).
  3.Provide feedback to the team or person (Meeting Rhythm)
  4.Give appropriately timed recognition and reward (because we're dealing with people,
   not machines).

The Rockefeller Habits provide the methodologies for leaders to delegate properly.
          NOTE: Beehives have only one leader. So why do companies need more?Some firms are experiment-
   ing with "bossless" organizations. In these companies, essentially everyone is a leader, able to act on his
       or her own. This requires a tremendous amount of training and development so all employees share the
       same DNA (values, purpose, knowledge, etc.) as the CEO. These "agile scaleups" (our preferred term)
     must also have technology-driven systems in place to handle several of the delegation activities listed
          earlier. Our favorite book on the topic is Steven Johnson's Emergence: The Connected Lives of
        Ants, Brains, Cities, and Software. The Rockefeller Habits, when fully implemented (and automated
      through technology), facilitate the decentralization of organizations, providing pheromone-like commu-
      nication and feedback trails similar to those that guide the activities of ants and other communities
   without bosses.
          WARNING: Since computing technology has yet to reach the capability of "HAL" in 2001: A Space
     Odyssey (though it's getting closer), organizations that attempt the bossless experiment find they stil
    need quasi-team leaders they call "champions" or some other related term. In reality, we still need these
  middle-management layers, for now.
28

---

                                                                                The Barriers

Repetition
The leader's final job is "to keep the main thing the main thing" — to keep the organization on
message and everyone heading in the same direction. L. David Marquet, author of Turn the Ship
Around!: A True Story of Turning Followers into Leaders, led the US Navy's worst nuclear sub to first
place in a year (without throwing anyone off the sub!). He had a picture hanging on the back of
 his stateroom door showing a man repeatedly asking his dog to sit, until the dog sits and the man
 exclaims, "Good dog!" This was a continual reminder to pick a message and then repeat it a lot until
 the organization responded.
 Repetition encompasses consistency. Finish what you start. Mean what you say. And don't say one
  thing and do something else. Consistency is an important aspect of repetition.
 We'll reinforce the power of repetition throughout the book. Specifically, we will look at:
   1. Core Values: the handful of rules defining the culture, which are reinforced through your
   People (HR) systems on a daily basis
   2.Core Purpose: the top leader's regular stump speech to keep everyone's heart engaged
   in the business
   Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG): the 10- to 25-year goal that provides constant
   context for all of the decisions made throughout the organization
   4.Priorities/Themes: a handful of three- to five-year, one-year, and quarterly priorities, which
   require repeated review on a daily and weekly basis to keep them top-of-mind

  A key function of leadership is delivering frequent messaging and metrics to reinforce these key
  attributes of the company and culture.

                            Scalable Infrastructure
  As an organization grows, it becomes more complex. It's a force of nature. The lowly amoeba can do
  everything it needs with one cell. (The home-based business is similar.) However, as the number of
  cells increases, the organism begins to develop subsystems — for feeding, elimination, circulation,
  procreation, etc. In order to survive, each cell must be located close enough to a nutritional source and
  have sufficient surface area to absorb energy and eliminate waste. That's why a cell can get only so big.
  The same is true for companies, only these subsystems (cells) represent the various functions, loca-
  tions, and business units within the organization (organism). As these subsystems grow, they must
  continue to segment, or they become too big and insular and thus experience the problems we see
  with large bureaucracies. Just as living cells need to be near nutrients, companies need to be close to
  customers (in terms of locations, product groups, and customer segments). This drives how companies
  structure their organizations and establish accountabilities.


29

---

 Scaling Up

     To keep things flowing, an organization needs a scalable infrastructure (similar to the blood supply
 and the nervous system). When you go from two employees to 10, you need better phone systems
         and more structured space. When your company reaches 50 employees, you still need space and
     phones, and you suddenly also require an accounting system that shows more precisely which projects,
        customers, or products are actually making money. Between 50 and 350 employees, your informa-
       tion-technology systems need to be upgraded and integrated. And above that, you must revamp them
     again, as the organization attempts to tie all systems into one comprehensive database. Otherwise, a
 simple change of address by a customer can unleash a series of expensive mistakes.
         NOTE:Don't decide the physical location of employees and teams haphazardly. Certain functions are
  best co-located together, which we'll discuss in the "People" section of the book. Even determining the
       location of restrooms, break rooms, and meeting rooms is important, especially when a company grows
  to occupy a second floor or more in a building. Serious communication issues surface when employees
  on different floors no longer bump into each other. The goal is to increase the cross-interaction (acci-
  dental collisions) of various individuals and functions.

                                Marketing
      The #1 functional barrier to scaling up is the lack of an effecting marketing department, separate
     from sales (accounting is the second — discussed in the Cash Section). Marketing is critical to both
  attracting new relationships (customers, talent, advisors, investors, etc.) to the business and addressing
      the increased competitive pressures (and eroded margins) as you scale. To prevent margin erosion,
    marketing's role (with lots customer input) is to determine the right what we should be selling to
  the best who's; and how best we should sell at the right price. And because marketing strategy equals
 strategy, the head of the organization is usually intimately involved in these decisions.
  It's Regis McKenna, author of the classic Relationship Marketing: Successful Strategies for The Age of
    the Customer, who taught Steve Jobs, Andy Grove, and most of the Silicon Valley tech stars how to
   market in the 80's. It was. McKenna and his firm that also guided Verne as he built his early global
    entrepreneurship organizations. McKenna's focus was twofold. First, the key to effective marketing
   is setting aside one hour per week to focus on marketing i.e. establish a marketing meeting (do you
  have one?). Second, to make a list of the top 25 (or 250 if you are a bigger firm) influencers — rela-
 tionships — you need to get behind the venture to scale it up. Then spend time each week figuring
    out how to network your way to these people. With a compelling vision (elevator pitch), then con-
vince these influencers to help.
    The more influential the names you put on the piece of paper, the more potential you have to scale
    the business bigger and faster. Being young and dumb, as a student at Wichita State University (go
   Shockers!), Verne boldly included President Ronald Reagan, Steve Jobs, Michael Dell, and the owners
  of Venture and Inc. magazines on his list of 25. What's crazy, in just 36 months of working the list,
     one hour per week, the Association of Collegiate Entrepreneurs (ACE) became a global "overnight"
    success, hosting a major event in Los Angeles for over 1100 entrepreneurs including Jobs and Dell
   with full page ads for the organization donated by Venture and Inc. magazines — and a congratulatory
telegram from President Reagan. So the first step is to stop and make your list!
30

---

                                                                                            The Barriers

     The other major agenda item for the weekly marketing meeting is Dr. Philip Kotler's 4Ps of market-
ing — Product, Price, Place, and Promotion. Of the four, pricing tends to get the least attention yet
     is one of the most important decisions you'll make. Whereas we'll spend hours working on the cost
  side of the business; the pricing side is lucky to get an educated guess. To up your skills in this area
       we strongly recommend reading pricing guru Hermann Simon's book Confessions of a Pricing Man:
    How Pricing Affects Everything. His firm Simon-Kucher & Partners is the leading pricing consultancy
in the world — you might consider engaging them.
      We also encourage you to search for Olgivy's 4Es of Marketing. One of the largest ad agencies in
the world, they have updated the 4Ps of marketing and have provided a complimentary online pre-
       sentation and whitepaper on the 4Es — Experience, Exchange, Everyplace, and Evangelism. Spend
 time each week working on how to execute better the 4Es of the business.
     Last, we encourage you to read Adele Revella's book Buyer Personas: How to Gain Insight into your
  Customer's Expectations, Align your Marketing Strategies, and Win More Business. Ultimately, marketing's
 job is to identify and attract the best (right) customers to the venture and arm the sales team (or those
  driving your online marketing activities) with a definitive list of prospects and plenty of information
    to help them make the sale. If not, sales teams (distributors) will chase any low hanging fruit they
 can find which is the quickest way to defocus the business and crush your margins.

 Market Dynamics
      More broadly, the marketplace makes you look either smart or dumb. When it's going your way, it
      covers up a lot of mistakes. When fortunes reverse, all your weaknesses seem to be exposed. Bil
     Gross, founder of IdeaLab which has launched over 100 companies, looked at the key factors to the
      success of growing firms — including people (team), strategy (business model and idea), and cash
      (funding). What he determined is that market timing trumped them all. Too early or too late with
 your great idea and you miss the wave.
      There's an additional cruel and counterintuitive market dynamic when you're growing a business.
     As the firm scales from $1 million to $10 million in revenue, the senior team tends to be focused
   externally on amassing new business. Yet this is precisely the time when a little more internal focus
 to establish healthy organizational habits and a scalable infrastructure, would pay off in the long term.
   As the business scales past $10 million, organizational complexities tend to draw the attention of the
     senior team inward (leading to firefighting). This is precisely when the team needs to be focused
      more externally on the marketplace (by talking to customers, as Rudy does), given the increased
 competitive pressures that come with size.
    There is also an important sequence of focus when it comes to your financial metrics. Between start-
 up and the first million or two in revenue, the key driver is revenue (sell like hell). The focus is on
    proving that a market exists for your services. As for cash, which many business owners might think
is the first focus, the entrepreneur has to rely mainly on family and friends (or fools!).
    It's between $1 million and $10 million that the team needs to focus on cash. Growth sucks cash, and
    since this is the first time the company will make a tenfold jump in size, the demands for cash wil
   soar. In addition, at this stage of organizational development, the company is still trying to figure
   out its unique position in the marketplace, and these experiments (or mistakes) can be costly. This is
                                                                                          31

---

Scaling Up

     when the cash model of the business needs to be worked out (e.g., "How is the business model going
      to generate sufficient cash for the company to keep growing?"). Will the business model generate
   its own cash internally; have sufficient lines of credit to sustain growth; and attract investors with
deep-enough pockets to support it?
     As the organization passes $10 million in revenue, new internal and external pressures come to the
  forefront. Externally, your organization is on more radar screens, alerting competitors to your threats.
       Customers are beginning to demand lower prices as they do more business with your company. At
 the same time, internal complexities increase, which cause costs to rise faster than revenue. All of this
   begins to squeeze an organization's gross margin. As gross margin slips a few points, the organization
    is starved of the extra money it needs in order to invest in infrastructure, like accounting systems
    and training. This creates a snowball effect of further expensive mistakes as the company passes the
 $25 million mark.
    To prevent the erosion in your margins, it's critical that you maintain a clear value proposition in
      the market. At the same time, the company must continually streamline and automate internal pro-
    cesses to reduce costs. Organizations successful at doing both will see their gross margins increase
during this stage of growth, giving them the extra cash they need to fund infrastructure, training,
 marketing, R&D, etc.
By the time it reaches $50 million in revenue, an organization should have enough experience and
  a strong-enough position in the market to predict profitability accurately. It's not that profit hasn't
  been important all along as the organization grows. It's just more critical, at this stage, that organi-
  zations generate predictable profit, since profit swings of a few percentage points either way represent
 millions of dollars.
   Which brings us full circle to the main function of a business leader: to build a predictable revenue
and profit engine in an unpredictable marketplace and world. The "20-Mile March" lesson from Jim
    Collins and Morten T. Hansen's book Great by Choice: Uncertainty, Chaos, and Luck — Why Some Thrive
       Despite Them All highlights how companies with steady growth year in and year out dramatically
 outperform firms that experience wild swings in revenue and profits.
     The spoils of victory go to those who maintain a steady pace, day in and day out, in all kinds of
  weather and storms. And it's this predictability, driven by effective processes, that is ultimately the
   key to crafting an organization that attracts and keeps top talent; creates products and services that
 satisfy customer needs; and generates significant wealth.
    In summary, growing a business is a dynamic process as the leadership team navigates the evolutions
    and revolutions of growth. And like the growth stages of a child, they are predictable and unavoid-
     able. To deal with these challenges, the company must grow the capabilities of the leadership team
  throughout the organization; install scalable infrastructure to manage the increasing complexities that
come with growth; and stay on top of the market dynamics that affect the business.
    To do this, there are 4 Decisions that leaders must address: People, Strategy, Execution, and Cash.
   These are the same four that Rudy and his team continue to face as they scale up their latest venture.
      The rest of the book is organized around these 4 Decisions, providing you with tools, techniques
and best practices for making the critical judgment calls that drive growth.

32

---

SCALING UP
PEOPLE

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

  THE PEOPLE INTRODUCTION

   KEY QUESTION:Arel stakeholders (mployees, custmers, shareolders)happy and end
   in the business; and would you "rehire" all of them?
  Business leaders need great people both inside the company and out — investors, suppliers, custom-
  er, partners, advisors —as well as a great support network at home. All of these people are critical
  to the business.
  So how do you know you need to make changes on the people side of the business, and in your life
  as you scale up the venture? Two questions:
  Are you happy? We're not talking about some kind of monklike peace, even in misery. This
   is a more straightforward question. Do you enjoy coming to work? Or are you experiencing
   ireonclabl issues wih business parters? Is ther  specexecutive ot etting the jo
   done? Is there a team member who disrupts everyone else? Is there a customer with too big
   a p  yo ven Is the spplot deliverig Is veor  he ba a
   your life difficult? Are you having issues with a family member or friend?
  2Would you enthusiastically rehire everyone, knowing what you know today?This goes hand-in-
   hand with the questions above (except for family!) and includes not only employees but
   existing customers, suppliers, and other stakeholders in the business. It's a painful question
   that requires one to face the brutal facts and make changes. It's especially tough when the
   company has simply outgrown some earlier relationships.
 If you fail to address these relationship issues head on, they will continue to drain your emotional
 energy, leaving little left to expend on the Strategy, Execution, and Cash aspects of the business.
 That's why we address People first in our 4 Decisions model.
   ACTION: Is there a relationship that is draining you emotionally? If you need to deal with a con-
   tentious situation, we suggest you read Crucial Conversations: Tools for Talking When Stakes Are
   High, by Kerry Patterson, et al

                                              Section Overview
     The first chapter, The Leaders, details three one-page People tools to help you think through your
   personal relationship goals; specific accountabilities for the company's functions and business units;
     and the various process accountabilities in your organization. Working through these will help you
recognize and prioritize the People challenges in your business and your life.
                  The on chapter, TheTeam shares tecnique or attring an hirn talet. We' ae
                                                 t        T
odology for interviewing and selecting the A Players you need to grow the business.

                                                                                             35

---

Scaling Up

The third chapter, The Managers, outlines five management practices that will keep everyone en-
gaged, productive, and happy; and ideas for continuously educating your people so the company
doesn't outgrow them. Nothing is tougher and more time-consuming than having to replace people
who haven't kept up with the growth of the business.

Three one-page People tools will be covered in this section:
1. One-Page Personal Plan (OPPP): provides a framework for people to plan their personal life
2.Function Accountability Chart (FACe): clarifies the people who are accountable for scaling
the business
3. Process Accountability Chart (PACe): lists the processes, and people accountable, that
 keep the business running smoothly
                     NOTE: The "e" in the FACe and PACe acronyms represents the energy and entrepreneurial spiri
 that leaders must possess in order to scale up a business.

      A special thank-you to Sebastian Ross, German tech entrepreneur and Gazelles International Certified Coach
partner in Barcelona, for co-authoring this "People" section and serving as an ongoing collaborator on the book.


 Everybody, Somebody, Anybody, And Nobody

 This is a little story about four people named Everybody
 Somebody, Anybody, and Nobody.
 There was an important job to be done and Everybody was sure
 that Somebody would do it.
Anybody could have done it, but Nobody did it.
Somebody got angry about that because it was Everybody's job.
Everybody thought that Anybody could do it, but Nobody
realized that Everybody wouldn't do it.
It ended up that Everybody blamed Somebody when Nobody did
what Anybody could have done.

Unknown author of condensed version of Charles Osgood's -
A Poem About Responsibility




36

---

Finance    Fitness    Friends    Family    Faith    0
           90 Days (Actions)     1 Year (Activities)    10-25 Years (Aspirations)


C










0 2

---

People: Function Accountability Chart (FACe)            Gazelles
                                                                                      GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES

 Name the person accountable for each function
 Ask the four questions at the bottom of the page re: whose name(s) you listed for each function
List Key Performance Indicators (KPls) for each function
Take your Profit and Loss (P/L), Balance Sheet (B/S), and Cash Flow accounting statements and assign
a person to each line item, then derive appropriate Results/Outcomes for each function



Functions                  Person  Leading Indicators    Results/Outcomes
                           Accountable  (Key Performance Indicators)    (P/L or B/S Items)
Head of Company
Marketing
R&D/Innovation
Sales
Operations
Treasury
Controller
Information Technology
Human Resources
Talent Development/Learning
Customer Advocacy



Heads of Business Units










Identify: 1. More than 1 Person in a Seat; 2. Person in more than 1 seat; 3. Empty seats; 4. Enthusiastically Rehire?



Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

People: Process Accountability Chart (PACe)    Gazelles
                                               GRowInG LEADeRS-GROWinG COMPAnIES



Identify 4 to 9 processes that drive your business.
Assign someone specific accountability for each process.
List Key Performance Indicators (KPls) for each process (better, faster, cheaper)





Person Accountable  Name of Process    KPIs
                                       Better, Faster, Cheaper










Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

3
THE LEADERS
The FACe and PACe
of the Company


             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: "The bottleneck is always at the top of the bottle," notes management guru
     Peter Drucker. Challenges within the company normally point to issues with, or among, the leaders. To address
  them, this chapter will focus on the leadership team. We will share three tools that help leaders get clear on their
    personal goals; define senior leadership accountabilities, key performance indicators (KPIs), and outcomes; and
    delineate the four to nine processes that drive the company. We include a short primer on organizational theory
   to help you think through how to properly divide the company into functions, product/service lines, and divisions.
  HINT: Keep everyone as close to his or her respective customers as possible!

     o-founders Stephen Roche and Simon Morrison realized that if they wanted to keep Shine
  Lawyers growing, they needed to bring up the next generation of leaders to drive the day-to-
             day so Roche and Morrison could focus on expansion. In addition to promoting Jodie Willey and
           Lisa Flynn into senior legal management roles, they brought on a new executive team to assist the
  600-person law firm, with 30 locations across Australia, in its next stage of growth.
        A decision to take the Rockefeller Habits-driven firm public, making it one of the first three law firms
           in the world to hold an IPO, spurred even more shifts in the organizational chart. Morrison moved
  to managing director, while Roche remained executive director, focused on fostering the strategic
            growth of the business through acquisitions and emerging opportunities. They also recruited new
 board members with key IPO experience.
 "We now have a great team of talented young people who will take the business to new heights,"
 says Morrison.
 As a company scales up, the toughest decisions involve people and their changing roles in the orga-
         nization, especially within the leadership team. Loyalties, egos, and personal friendships make these
           decisions even more difficult when the company faces a situation in which it has outgrown some of
 its early leaders.
 In this chapter, we'll explore these senior leadership dynamics of a growing company, and the functions
 and processes needed to scale up the business. But first, a quick primer on organizational design.

                                                                                       41

---

Scaling Up

The Organization: A Growing Organism
        Remember the days when the start-p team was crammed into a single ofce like clowns squeezd
     into a Volkswagen? Now the company has 150 employees, or 1,500, and you find it infinitely more
    difficult to know how to divide up teams and set clear accountabilities. Worse, both customers and
employees seem confused about how to navigate your organization.
  We can take a clue from nature to solve these problems. Human organisms are made up of billions o cell

  it reaches a certain size, the outer membrane won't have enough surface area to bring in nutrients and
                                          eapr  T  will r oe u
  This means that the cell must divide. So, too, must your company or it won't be able to function in a
  healthy way. And just as no cell can be too far from the blood supply, no team can be too far removed
    from the action of the marketplace — or so big that it becomes unwieldy and unresponsive (think of
   Amazon's "two-pizza rule" — no team should be so big that it can't be fed with two pizzas). This is
   the main principle underpinning effective organizational design. Divide big teams into smaller ones
                      al rou projects prouc lnes, custme ents, eraphicl ocatons base
   idea of getting everyone in the organization into small teams and as close to his or her respective
   customers as possible. This is a way to increase the surface area of the company, giving the maximum
number of employees a chance to interact with the marketplace.
  Each cell within the organization must have someone clearly accountable for it. This doesn't mean the
  person is boss andor gets to make all the decisions. In fact,it's important to delineate the ifferencs
between accountability, responsibility, and authority.

Accountability, Responsibility, and Authority
Though spelled differently, these business terms are often haphazardly interchanged. Here are our
definitions:
 Accountability: This belongs to the ONE person who has the "ability to count" — who is track-
 ing the progress and giving voice (screaming loudly) when issues arise within a defined task,
 team, function, or division. It doesn't mean he or she makes all the decisions (or even any de-
  cisions) — which is why people often talk about leaderless teams. However, someone must stil
 be accountable. The rule: If more than one person is accountable, then no one is accountable
  and that's when things fall through the cracks.
  Responsibility: This falls to anyone with the "ability to respond" proactively to support the team.
 It includes all the people who touch a particular process or issue.
  Authority: This belongs to the person or team with the      "If more than one person
  final decision-making power.
   As an example, Gazelles' CFO has accountability for cash —  is accountable, then no one
  she literally "counts" and reports it to the team daily. And  is accountable."
42

---

                                                                                                The Leaders

 she's accountable for alerting the team if she senses any potential issues now or later in the year. In turn,
    Verne, as CEO, maintains the authority over cash, signing off on major expenditures and investments.
 And everyone in the company has responsibility for making sure that cash is spent wisely and that deals/
 contracts are structured so they help generate vs. absorb cash as Gazelles continues to scale up.

 But don't accountability and authority need to be roughly equal — as in "I need sufficient authority if
 I'm going to be held accountable?" For frontline staff, yes. At a Ritz-Carlton hotel, where the philosophy
 is that any employee who receives a complaint from a guest "owns" that complaint (accountability),
 first-line employees such as desk clerks, bellhops, and housekeepers are empowered (authority) to
 spend up to $2,000 to handle any customer complaints. Managers can spend up to $5,000 without
 additional authorization. A full 250 to 300 hours of first-year training make this possible.

 As one moves up the organization into more middle and senior management positions, it's assumed
 that this balance of accountability and authority holds. However, those who have advanced up the
ranks find that they've taken on increasingly more accountability for things they have less and less
real control over — until they reach the top and find they are liable (often legally) for anything that
goes wrong in an organization that is expanding beyond their day-to-day reach. This is why leaders
          get paid the big bucks — to bridge this ever-increasing gap between accountability and authority,
 using their skills of communication, persuasion, education, visioning, etc.

 Getting accountabilities clear throughout the organization is crucial. To assist, we have three one-
 page People tools to help you think through your personal relationship goals; assign specific ac-
 countabilities for the company's functions and business units; and delineate the various process
accountabilities in your organization. Working through these will help you identify and prioritize
 the People challenges on which you need to focus next in scaling up the organization.

 One-Page Personal Plan (OPPP)

 People often joke that the best moments of owning a boat were   e: Oneage  anOp             Gazelles
 the day they bought the boat and the day they sold it

 There are similar punctuation marks in our lives — the day
we're born and the day we pass away. As busy executives, if we're
 not careful, we can find that our personal lives end up as ne-
glected as those vessels forever docked in the harbor (or parked
 in storage!). Thus, we're big believers in establishing personal
priorities and aligning them with your professional goals.

Just as there are 4 Decisions you make to build a thriving
 company — People, Strategy, Execution, and Cash — there are                NE
 parallel areas in your personal life - Relationships, Achieve-
 ments, Rituals, and Wealth. We encourage each leader of a
company to complete a One-Page Personal Plan (OPPP). As
with all the one-page tools we'll detail in this book, you can
                                                                                                  43

---

 Scaling Up

 find a three-quarter-sized copy of the OPPP in the section introduction, or download a full-sized
 copy at scalingup.com.
 To complete the OPPP, start by filling in the Name and Date spaces at the top. Next, let's walk
 through the four columns of the OPPP.

 Column1 - Relationships

     In the end, what matters most in life are the depth of your relationships with friends and family; and
        the sheer number of people you've helped along the way. These represent true measures of wealth.
   Financial wealth, then, is seen as a resource for fostering your relationships. For an inspirational story
      about an entrepreneur who used his wealth to help millions, read Conor O'Clery's The Billionaire Who
       Wasn't: How Chuck Feeney Secretly Made and Gave Away a Fortune (you'll also pick up some important
tips on scaling up a global business).
  NOTE: The list of 5Fs located down the left-hand side of the OPPP — Faith, Family, Friends, Fitness,
      and Finance — is contributed by James Hansberger. He found, through his decades as a wealth advisor,
 that what mattered most to those near the end of their life were these 5Fs, in the order they are listed.
  They serve as a gentle reminder as you set priorities in the OPPP.

       Starting at the top of column 1, list the key groups of people with whom you want a lasting rela-
        tionship (10 to 25 years). In business, you have a tremendous opportunity to help your employees
      and customers — so consider adding them categorically to the list. In your personal life, important
relationships include family and friends.

     Also list the various communities in which you're involved. Ted Leonsis, a Greek-American sports team
    owner, venture capital investor, filmmaker, and philanthropist, is author of The Business of Happiness:
     6 Secrets to Extraordinary Success in Life and Work. He notes in his book a strong correlation between
happiness and the number of diverse communities in which you are active.

  The next step is to look at the groups listed and pick a few key relationships on which to focus your atten-
tion for the next 12 months and the next 90 days. Verne took a year to focus on spending more time with
    his 6-year-old son, Quinn; and one quarter with his sister, who needed support with some health issues.

     At the same time, there may be some people in your personal or professional life who are destructive —
      literally draining the life out of you — and/or distract you from your higher goals. There's a space
 on the form where you can note relationships you want to end gracefully

 Column 2-Achievements

Many CEOs find that even after reaching critical milestones for growing their company, they still
 feel they haven't made a real difference in the world. The achievements section of the OPPP can
pave the way to a more meaningful life. Think about the major ways you'd like to make an impact
44

---

                                                                                           The Leaders

        through your work beyond reaching monetary goals — perhaps by mentoring others or setting up a
nonprofit organization — and set objectives in these key areas.
In your personal life, you'll want to think about how you can make a real difference to the key people
in your le. For instance, you might aim to have a blissful marriage, instead of just staying marred,
as many people do.Signing on to facilitate the five-year strategic plan for his children's school was
an achievement Verne enjoyed prioritizing while writing this book.
The key is focusing on short-, medium-, and long-term achievements relative to the people listed
in the relationship column. This might include stopping the pursuit of achievements that are taking
you away from the relationships that matter most.

Column 3 - Rituals
Etlishing reguruten yourewll e youachiveyour rgergals. Exampetual mht
include planning a weekly date night with your spouse and booking some alone time with each child
once a week. For distant family members, you might schedule a regular routine of biannual gatherings.
You might also establish rituals with people whose presence in your life supports your bigger goals
Meeting regularly with a workout buddy; spending time with close friends; participating in a busi
ness forum of like-minded leaders; and having a peer coach (a friend who holds you accountable
each day — a recommendation by über-executive coach Marshall Goldsmith) are some examples.
And just as there are destructive people with whom you need to end your relationship, there might
be some bad habits or behaviors you wish to stop — particularly those that have proved harmful to
those around you.

Column 4 - Wealth
Rather than viewing financial wealth as an end in itself (as a wise guru once told Verne, "All assets
become liabilities!"), see it as a resource for supporting the rest of your personal plan. Besides de-
termining how much money you want to set aside for retirement, set goals for the amount of money
you want to donate to causes and communities that matter to you over the
next several years. Decide how much money you need to support activities  "All assets become
with your family and friends, investing in experiences in the coming 12   liabilities!"
months that create lasting memories. And note any wealth-producing assets
or cash-draining liabilities you need to address in the coming months.
Overall, focus on how your wealth will flow through you in the service of others, rather than hoarding
it This seems to attract more wealth — the natural law of reciprocity. Lynne Twist's insightful book
tied The Soul ofMoney: Transorming Your Relationship With Money and Life expounds upon this idea
We hope you find the OPPP a useful planning tool for your life. Let's now turn our focus to the company.
                                                                                       45

---

Scaling Up

                Function Accountability Chart (FACe)

              The second one-page People tool — the Function Account-    People:uncin Acontaby a FAC  Gazelles
ability Chart (FACe) — focuses on making sure you have the               Name the porson socountae tr each funcion
right butts in the right seats at the top of the organization (i.e.      Ask the tour questions at the bottom of the pae re wh
the "right people doing the right things right").
                                                                                                                              ance Irdeators    Pl. o  b
        An organization is simply an amplifier of what's happening at
the senior level of the company, which is one of the reasons
our coaching partners do a quick employee survey as they start
working with a business. If the survey reveals that the IT peo-
ple are upset with marketing, there is likely an issue between
those two functional leaders at the top.
The chart lists a common set of functions that must exist in ALL
companies. Even start-ups have all these functions, only it's the
founder(s) doing everything! In scaling the business, the idea
is to figure out which function on the chart to delegate next.           Caprger X+1 Gks nc

Like Shine Lawyers' Morrison and Roche, who continue to promote and recruit new leadership as
the business scales, you want to delegate the functions listed on the FACe tool to leaders who pass
two tests (including culture fit):
  They don't need to be managed.
2. They regularly wow the team with their insights and output.
The chart asks you to list one or two key performance indicators (KPIs) for each function. These
KPIs represent the measurable activities each functional leader needs to perform on a day-to-day
basis. The last column on the chart captures the outcomes expected for each function (i.e., who is
accountable for revenue, gross margin, profit, cash, etc.). These outcomes normally represent line
items on the financial statements.

When completed, this one-page accountability tool helps you diagnose where you have people and
performance gaps on the leadership team.
As a general rule, you can move people up or over into these functional positions at any time. How-
ever, if you need to bring someone in from the outside to fill a senior leadership position, you should
do this only once every six to nine months. It takes this length of time to find the right person, get
him comfortable in the position, and transfer the DNA of the organization into his psyche. In turn,
the new executive will need this amount of time to positively impact the organization enough to pay
back his salary.

Now you can afford to bring in another leader. The rule is to take it slow when bringing outsiders
into senior leadership roles. The exception is when the company is venture-backed and/or growing
100% a year and needs to bring on three or four key executives within a short period of time.

46

---

                                                                              The Leaders

       WARNING: Whatever is the strength of a leader often becomes the weakness of the organization
       (e.g., if the founder is strong in marketing, the business may eventually find it's weak in this function-
      al area). Why? Because leaders have a tendency to hold on too tight, strangling the efforts of those
      around them. Or the leaders figure they can "watch over the details," bringing in someone too junior to
      oversee the function vs. bringing on the powerhouse they really need. Instead, leaders must make a
      counterintuitive decision and find people who exceed their own capabilities in their area of strength, to
      prevent the company from stalling.
  Please read through the following instructions for completing the FACe tool. It often illuminates
  immediate changes that might need to be made at the top of the organization.

       Completing Your Function Accountability Chart (FACe)
 STEP 1

 The first column lists the functions every business must support and provides a few blanks so you
  can add those unique to your business. There is also space to note discrete business units. Notice we
  don't list titles (CEO, COO, etc.). The idea is to focus on the jobs that need to get done.
  1. Start by having each member of the executive team fill in the first blank column by adding
    the initials of the person they think is accountable for each function or business unit. It's
    acceptable if a function is outsourced (i.e., to an outsourced CFO or marketing consultant).
   If it's outsourced to a firm, list the main person accountable from the contracted company.
  2.We've provided a couple of blank lines for you to add functions that might be unique to
     your industry or business (for example, a chief technical officer or a quality control person).
     There is also space to list the names of various business units. For Gazelles, these would
    include Gazelles International, Gazelles Growth Institute, GazellesPro, and the other divi-
   sions we support.
         U NOTE: When looking at business units farther down the first column, even though you might
           not have formal business units, you might organize discrete teams around customer groups,
       product lines, or locations. You can consider these quasi-business units
  3. Compare lists to see if there's agreement among the members of the leadership team. There
   often isn't, even when it comes to who is the head of the company!
      2
STEP

Once the team has agreed on the people accountable for each function, consider the four questions
 summarized at the bottom of the form:
  1. Do you have more than one person accountable for a function? The founder might be sharing
   accountability for sales with another executive, or partners might all be listed next to "head
   of company." The rule is that only one person should be accountable; otherwise, there wil
   be confusion. Having more than one name in a box is a red flag.

                                                                                                 47

---

Scaling Up
Does someone's name show up in more boxes than everyone else's? We recognize that in growth
  companies, leaders may wear multiple hats, but if one executive's name shows up three or
  four times compared to everyone else's one or two, that leader is either going to die young
  (a little dramatic) or one of the functions he or she owns will not be supported sufficiently
  This is another red flag.

  The FACe of Perly Fullerton
  When James Perly and Mark Fullerton worked through the Function Accountability Chart
  (FACe) for their Ontario-based consultancy, Perly Fullerton, a problem immediately jumped
  out at them: There were six people in the room, but only three names were being put in the
  boxes. "The problem was that everyone was coming to us for everything," says Perly. "Even
  though we hired new people, we just never got rid of any of our senior responsibilities."
  Although it was a long process, now everybody knows exactly who's accountable, including
  Perly and Fullerton. "Our roles became really clear in our own minds based on what suits
  us best for our personalities," says Perly. "Mark is more of a go-getter with lots of energy,
  so he's the chief operating officer because he drives things forward. I take on more of a
  visionary role [as president], focusing on strategy.'

3. Do you have any boxes with no names in them? This often happens when someone says, "Hey,
  who's accountable for marketing?" and the response is, "All of us!" "All of us" really means
  "none of us," and the box should be left blank. This doesn't necessarily require you to hire
  someone. Let's take the customer advocacy box as an example. You may have seven or eight
  people who are overseeing various groups of customers. It's natural to conclude that this
  accountability is covered. The rule of accountability means one person must ultimately take
  ownership, however, so the person to whom these people report has overall accountability. But
  if that leader isn't doing anything active to monitor levels of customer delight and follow up,
  then this function will underperform. Rather than hire an additional person, you might choose
  one of the customer service reps to hold overall accountability, rotating this role among the
  reps every six months. Again, this doesn't mean that any of these people is the boss; it means
  they are to monitor the situation, ensure that customer-satisfaction feedback is gathered and
  reported to the leadership team at the weekly meeting, and alert the team if there are issues.
  Dell's Empty Boxes
  A company is never so big or sophisticated that it doesn't sometimes encounter "empty
  boxes" on its organizational chart. When Michael Dell took back the reins of computer
  company Dell Inc. in January 2007, he lamented that the chief marketing officer (CMO)
  position had been empty for two years even though Kevin Rollins had more than 20
  executives on the executive leadership team. And indicative of Dell's customer service
  problems, there was no one leading the customer advocacy function. So Dell immediately
  hired Mark Jarvis from Oracle to be the CMO and moved over Dick Hunter from man-
  ufacturing to lead the customer service function. That was the beginning of a turnaround
  and repositioning of Dell that led to Michael taking the company private again in 2013.
48

---

                                                                                     The Leaders

4.Are you enthusiastic about the person you have in each box ? If the leader isn't getting the job
 done, then a change may need to be made. Maybe this leader is in the wrong seat or in too
  many seats. Maybe there are performance issues. Maybe a person is talented but doesn't fit the
  culture (this often happens when a "big company" executive is brought into a growing firm)

  ACTION: Discuss these four questions and decide where there are glaring gaps in the leadership team.
  WARNING: CEOs often avoid these decisions because they involve executives who have become
 dear friends. We recognize that this is a touchy subject, but it must be faced if the organization is to
 grow. One option is for some of the early team members to help launch a new product or division. They
  are usually more comfortable in a start-up situation or working on a smaller team. And several of the
  early leaders might be relieved to have the burden of an increasingly important and complex function
 taken off their shoulders. You won't know until you have these crucial conversations
 3
STEP

     The second blank column is for listing one to three KPIs for each of the listed functions. These
     are intended to be leading indicators, measuring the daily and weekly activities of a particular
     leader and meant to drive superior results. For help in selecting KPIs appropriate for your in-
        dustry and/or function, visit KPILibrary.com. For more general KPIs, we recommend the book
Key Performance Indicators: The 75 Measures Every Manager Needs to Know, by Bernard Marr.

 WARNING: A common mistake is simply noting down KPIs that are representative of the daily and
 weekly activities of the person listed for a particular function. It's critical to zero-base your KPI decisions.
 Do this by covering up the names listed in the "Person Accountable" column (metaphorically or physi-
      cally) and then decide on KPIs for each function that align with the business model of the company.
  Then consider if the person in the job function has the skills and aptitude to deliver on those KPIs. A
 mismatch might indicate a potential problem.

"Head of Company" KPI
          What is the most important KPI for the head of the company? Many might suggest vision,
but how do you measure that? Others might suggest more tangible measures, like return on
        investment or profit, but these are outcomes more suitable for the last column on the FACe
  tool. Again, the idea of a leading indicator is to measure the specific actions that lead to results.
     In the case of the head of the company, it's simply the ratio of all the other boxes on the FACe
      tool that are right (i.e., the main job of the head of the company is to make sure she has the
        right people doing the right things right). And when many founders/CEOs realize this, they
         often bring in someone else to head the company so they can focus on R&D or marketing or
customer advocacy. That's why we emphasize separating titles from functions.

      The late W. Edwards Deming, who led the quality revolution around the world, believed that the
   fundamental job of a leader is prediction. The right KPIs, along with sufficient market intelligence
                                                                                                  49

---

Scaling Up

(discussed in "The Data" chapter), help executives navigate what are expected to be turbulent markets
throughout the foreseeable future.
  ACTION: In the third column of the FACe, note one or two KPIs — leading indicators — for each
  function and business unit.
STEP4
      For the fourth column of the FACe — "Results/Outcomes" — pull out a recent detailed Profit and
     Loss (P&L) and Balance Sheet (B/S) statement and assign a person accountable for each line item.
     Then discuss the same four questions we asked earlier about the people listed for the functions
(summarized at the bottom of the FACe tool):
 1. Do you have more than one person accountable for any line item (like revenue)?
 2. Does someone's name show up next to more line items than anyone else's?
 3. Do you have a line item with no name next to it (is someone watching telecommunication expense)?
 4. Are you enthusiastic about the person you have accountable for each line item?

   Again, don't confuse accountability for authority — recall the earlier cash example within Gazelles.
     And, as with the functions, spread the workload evenly among the leadership team, with just one
person ultimately accountable for each line item.
      It was Jack Stack, founder and CEO of SRC Holdings Corporation and author of the classic book
    The Great Game of Business: The Only Sensible Way to Run a Company, who argued that the Phoenician
 monks left out a critical column on the first accounting statements they created in the late 1400s: the
   "Who" column. There should be a person clearly accountable for each line item, even if it's a middle
or lower manager, when considering a highly detailed P&L and B/S.
  This exercise has led to some of the most important accountability discussions we've ever facilitated
    in companies. Who is accountable for overall revenue? Who is protecting gross margins from overly
     zealous pricing concessions? Is anyone watching telecommunications expenses? And for those enam-
   ored of formal organizational charts (we're not — in growing firms, they tend to be outdated by the
    time they are printed), consider rotating the P&L clockwise 90 degrees and aligning each executive
     with one of the major line items (CFO owning profit to the left; COO owning gross margin in the
     middle; VP of sales owning revenue to the right; etc.). Then you have middle managers owning the
    next layer of line items and frontline managers or employees owning the last detailed line items.
    Finish by listing the head of the company at the top of this rotated P&L and you have a useful ac-
countability chart from a results standpoint.
          ACTION: This is a great exercise for the CFO or person in charge of accounting to lead. Go through
      your financial statements and decide who is accountable for each line item. Then pick the most import-
 ant line items for each of the functions listed on your FACe tool and transfer the answers to the "Results/
  Outcomes" column.

50

---

                                                                                 The Leaders

  NOTE: Most organizations, at some point in time, develop detailed job descriptions for all the key
      roles in a company . a huge project. We are not big fans of job descriptions and prefer Topgrading's
  Job Scorecards, which you'll learn about in the next chapter.
           Jim Collins, in his book How the Mighty Fal, And Why Some Companies Never Give In, shares a key
       insight he's discovered when working with executive teams. When he initially asks them to introduce
   themselves, he finds that executives with good companies tend to share their titles, whereas executives
            n epan ah hbli  vmeabhi
 I am accountable for driving revenue into this company."
A concise FACe, with single points of accountability and relevant KPIs and outcomes, aligns with
 Collins' insight about the leaders of great companies.

  Organizational Structure - Beyond Functions
     The first natural organizational split is by function. When the business gets above 50 employees, the
   organization needs to start aligning teams around projects, product groups, industry segments, and geo-
  graphical regions. This is the beginning of what is commonly called a matrix organization (see diagram).

 The Almost Matrix                                         The pressure to create these new business units
                                                          usually comes from customers. They complain that
                      FUNCTIONS                             they don't know whom to call to get help. They
                      Ops          IT                      get the runaround when they finally reach some-
                  Sales    HR                               one. And they feel overwhelmed by the crush of
                                                           communications that come from multiple business
                                                            units. Internally, employees may not know from
  Strategic                              whom they should take direction.
  Business
  Units (SBUs)    Unless you get accountabilities straight, produc-
                                         tivity and innovation will slow, and you'll waste
                  a lot of time oscillating between centralizing and
                  decentralizing various shared functions among the
                                         business units.
To navigate this organizational transition, the functional heads, who have been used to driving the
business, need to adapt. They need to become more like coaches/advisors to the business unit leaders,
rather than acting as their "bosses." In turn, the heads of the business units need to lead as if they are
individual CEOs. You don't want weak "yes-people" heading up your business units.
This transition is hardest for the traditional functional leaders — especially for those who were around
in the earlier start-up phase. Used to making unilateral decisions, many will have to switch their style
from telling to selling as they spend more time outside the organization garnering best practices and
then sharing what they've learned among the business unit leaders. And respect for the functional
les l av r lany  s   .
                                                                                 51

---

Scaling Up

  Because of these needed transitions, it's often best to have some of the original functional leaders
      head business units — maybe head up expansion to a new country or lead the lunch o a product
  line — so they can maintain direct operational control. New functional heads are then recruited who
                         v ecai expe l, markeigHR, n wil bemore collaboraiv  wi
with the business unit leaders.

Who Is Boss in a Matrix Organization?
A matrix organization is also a challenge for employees since they feel like they have multiple bosses.
     Employees might be serving several business units,n adition tohaving afunctional head oversei
all their activities.
   The key is being clear who decides whether an employee gets a raise or a promotion. The mistake is
                                                h    IT
                        marki spport  sv prouc iesThe ncil e  mare or he cmp ut
 see his or her role as a trainer/coach to Tom and make it clear that his performance is assessed based
   on feedback from the heads of the business units Tom serves — and not on what the functional head
alone thinks. This way, Tom remains responsive first and foremost to the business units.
     Matrix organizations are tricky, and you should seek expert guidance (we can help). Otherwise,
   companies can waste a lot of time debating about the centralized or decentralized structure, with
endless fights over overhead allocations and accountabilities.
 Once you have established clear accountabilities, you'l know very soon if you've gotten it right. Cus-
 tomers will be happy, and everyone on your team will be clear on his or her role in serving customers.
  If you notice patterns of negative feedback from customers — or see internal signs that your "cell"
are not healthy — it's time to revisit the question of organizational structure.
   Remember, your company is a living organism that needs to survive in an environment that's always
  changing. To thrive, it has to be able to adapt. Charles Darwin found that survival is determined by
the ability to adapt to circumstances.

                                  Process Accountability Chart (PACe)
  The third one-page People tool — the Process Accountability Chart (PACe) — lists who is accountable
  for each of the four to nine processes that drive the business and how each process will be measured
to guarantee it's running smoothly.
   Example processes include: developing and launching a product; generating leads and closing sales;
   attracting, hiring, and onboarding new employees; and billing and collecting payments. Almost all
these processes cut across the various functions, requiring a coordination of activities that gets more
complicated as the organization scales up.

52

---

                                                                                           The Leaders

 Pc Gazelles                                To keep these processes streamlined, we strongly recommend
                                            that companies implement the principles of Lean, a manage-
                                     ment practice invented by Toyota that is as applicable to service
                                           businesses as to manufacturing companies. (It's no accident
                       that Eric Ries called his book The Lean Startup.)
                                          Lean is an approach to process design focused on eliminating
                                         time wasted on activities that don't add value for customers.
                                          Using Lean practices, John Stepleton of Research Data Design
                                             (RDD) realized a 28% productivity improvement in his call
                                              centers within a week; Jeff Booth, co-founder and CEO of
                                         Vancouver, Canada-based BuildDirect, was able to dramatically
                                         speed up the time it takes to get a vendor up on his building
                                         materials website; Mike Jagger saved $60,000 in IT costs from
                                             his first Lean session at Provident Security; and Ken Sim
                                            co-founder of the award-winning franchise Nurse Next Door,
                                        was able to handle a 100% increase in business in 2008 without
                       adding any headquarters staff.
We are so bullish on Lean that we're confident that the first company in any industry to fully embrace
this methodology will dominate. And for those thinking that Lean is synonymous with the overly
complicated and expensive Six Sigma approach to quality improvement, you can relax. Lean, though
it requires a real change in mindset, uses a few very simple tools to drive dramatic improvements.
 Following are four more detailed examples of how the middle-market company leaders just mentioned
                aplid Lean to ther pros. We'lthenfollo wi sehowos o using the ACe pa
 Power of Lean
     John Stepleton — who built 500-person research company RDD, listed three times on the Inc.
     500 — was the first CEO to turn us on to Lean as a powerful tool for middle-market service
  firms. He applied it so successfully that his former firm was recognized by the Northwest Shingo
 Prize for its innovative implementation of the Lean principles.
 If you're not sure that Lean is right for your business, Stepleton emphasizes, "I implemented Lean
   into my call center business, where I had $10/hour employees engaged in continuous improvement
  programs, that realized productivity improvements of 28% in time periods as short as one week."
     One of the keys to Lean is objectively modeling and measuring productivity and then using
   simple visual systems to eliminate costly mistakes. In Stepleton's case, his team color-coded
 research forms to make sure the appropriate number of subjects was called for each campaign.
 Operational Excellence
    "One of the things that a company can control in any market is operational excellence by re-
      moving waste in a system," notes Jeff Booth, co-founder and CEO of BuildDirect. In doing

                                                                        53

---

Scaling Up

        so, Booth has dramatically sped up the time it takes to get a new vendor up on his building
 materials website.
        Booth engaged Guy Parsons, early partner with Jim Womack at the Lean Institute, to help him
     with his initiatives. Booth also produced a five-minute video interview of Parsons as a way to ex-
    plain to his team and others how they are using Lean. You can visit scalingup.com to view the video.
 EliminatingWaste
         "Lean describes waste as anything that happens in a company that a customer would not want
         to pay for," explains Mike Jagger, CEO of Vancouver, Canada-based Provident Security. "So
                                             was vo o o chiat
 clients and things that don't
    "For instance, we have a huge IT investment that we require for our monitoring business, which adds
  client value," continues Jagger. "However, our clients don't care who hosts our email.. so we cancelled
our scheduled server upgrade for our exchange servers and migrated the entire company to Gmail."
         First-year savings on hardware, software, management, and support were just under $60,000.
    "We have another great tool now to help us look at the business in a very different way," Jagger
 says, with regard to Lean.
 Bored Billing Accountant
Ken Sim sent us a partial list of dramatic outcomes from Nurse Next Door's first year of im-
 plementing Lean, including growing the business by 100% the following year with eight fewer
 people in the head office. That's a huge net gain in productivity.
      NOTE: Sim emphasizes that there were eight fewer people because of natural attrition. "We will
  never let go ofa person because of Lean," exclaims Sim."Otherwise, Lean will die as an initiative.
  No one is going to implement stuff that will end up costing them their job."

       Case in point: Nurse Next Door's payroll and billing accountant, Noreen, was working evenings
        and weekends before implementing Lean. A year later, with twice the payroll, she was accom-
        plishing the job in half the time. When she mentioned in a huddle that she had nothing to do
       because of her success, the leadership team suggested she take some time off as an example and
        incentive for everyone else in the office to pursue Lean initiatives. Nurse Next Door is now
        teaching these Lean techniques to its franchise partners, so they can work on growing their
businesses vs. doing payroll all day.
       Parsons, like Sim, warns that Lean is not about reducing headcount. It's about reducing waste.
        Redirect the time and energy your people get back from eliminating wasted efforts, devoting
 them to serving customers, making sales, and growing the business.
        Nurse Next Door's additional gains from.Lean include doubling the current volume of its call
      center without adding headcount, while reducing fees to franchise partners; eliminating process
         steps to ease franchise partners' work flow and make more money; reducing inventory levels
     to almost zero so franchise partners require much less capital to start and run their businesses;
and streamlining the process for adding new franchise partners.
54

---

The Leaders

   Adds Sim: "It used to be a challenge to add one new franchise partner each quarter. Now we add
         two per month and can add up to five per month without breaking a sweat! More important,
our Lean initiatives are a major reason (but not the only one) that we and our franchise partners
have been able to thrive during a terrible economic period."


  Completing Your Process Accountability Chart (PACe)
 STEP 1

      Gather your executive team together (it's smart to include some middle managers) and name the
   four to nine key processes driving the business. Several of the processes — like "How do we bill and
   collect from customers?" — will be similar for most companies. However, there will be a few that are
  specific to your firm or industry. In our experience, this chart takes a couple of 90-minute sessions
     to complete. Here are the seven processes for Barcelona-based Softonic, the world's leading Web
 portal for downloading free, safe software:
  Recruitment
  Product development
  Sales to cash
  Innovation
  People development
  Customer satisfaction
  Content creation and publication

  ACTION: Discuss and agree on the four to nine key processes in your organization.

STEP2

  Next, assign accountability for each process to a specific person. This can be a more difficult deci-
  sion than initially perceived. Since processes cut across various functions, there might be some turf
    battles between the functions. In this case, remind everyone that assigning someone accountability
   for a process doesn't mean that he is the new boss of everyone who touches the process, nor does he
   necessarily have increased decision-making authority. His job is to monitor the process (time, cost,
  quality), let the team know if there are any issues, and lead a regular meeting to fix or improve that
particular process. Ideally, this person will have some cross-functional experience.
The person to whom all these process leaders report is usually the head of operations (a COO type).
Operations people are generally systems-focused. You want a head of operations who is obsessed with
process mapping and improvement — or better yet, experienced in implementing Lean.

                                                                                    55

---

Scaling Up
   ACTION: For each key process you've identified, decide who within the organization will be ac-
   countable. These people are then accountable to the head of operations.
STEP3
     Identify a few KPIs to track each process. As with the FACe tool, the Process Accountability Chart
    () requires that each process have indicators (time, cost, or quality) that wil signify its health.
      One of the most important KPIs for processes is time — in either number of days (to deliver) or
       number of hours (to produce). It applies to almost every industry, as customers normally want
                               thi bet fr  ee wheer we' lkbou  ouc  iAloh  i
    not the only KPI, it does drive efficiency in your business and customer satisfaction and is the key
measurement in the Lean process of designing and streamlining processes.
   ACTION:List one to three KPIs for each process to measure its speed, quality, and cost.
Following are a few resources that can help you improve the PACe of the organization.

Mapping the Process
       Once you have completed your PACe, gather someone from every function that touches a specific
     prcess, including a few customers who are afected by the process (f possible). Using colored Pos
 Notes to represent each function (sales is green, accounting is blue, ec.), map out the steps and decision
                                                t The   be  h
wasteful steps and removing obstacles.
    For instance, think about how a certain piece of paper (physical or electronic) moves from a website
    to an email inbox, to an order fulfillment desk in the warehouse, including emailed confirmations
     and order tracking systems for the customer. You'll be surprised at the number of steps and people
 required for a simple process.
    Along the way, set specific KPIs at critical steps and decision points, so the process can be moni-
        tored continuously. The beauty of identifying and documenting the processes in your business
       is that it provides you with an excellent how-to manual for new employees or existing ones who
 are off track.
     It's important to revisit and examine one process every 90 days as part of your quarterly planning
     process. Like hallway closets and garages, these processes get junked up and need to be recleaned
      periodically. With four to nine processes, each will get examined roughly every 12 to 24 months
 which is sufficient to keep your company running drama-free.
 ACTION: Assemble the appropriate people for each key process, and list, debate, and decide the steps
   and decision points for that process.

 56

---

                                                                      The Leaders

  NOTE:As mentioned earlier in the PACe section of this chapter, we highly recommend using the tools
  from Lean to both map and improve your processes. Take a look at Paul Akers' "2 Second Lean'
  videos on YouTube, including how to set up a "lean desk.'

 Checklists

    Once you've identified and mapped your processes, you can then bring them to life every day through
   checklists. Checklists are valuable for key parts of your four to nine processes and help ensure that
 the right things happen.
   In his book The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right, Dr. Atul Gawande shares how his research
    on improving success in surgeries came down to a simple surgery checklist. Among Gawande's findings:
    "[Checklists help] with memory recall and clearly set out the minimum necessary steps in a process.
  ... In this one hospital, the checklist had prevented forty-three infections and eight deaths and saved
  two million dollars in costs. ... [Checklists] provide a kind of cognitive net. They catch mental flaws
   inherent in all of us — flaws of memory and attention and thoroughness. ... I have yet to get through
 a week in surgery without the checklist's leading us to catch something we would have missed."
 Apple stores draw more people in one single quarter than visit Disney's four major theme parks in one
   year. How does Apple do it? One reason is that it is known for delivering fantastic customer service.
   An article appearing in The Wall Street Journal shared some insight on Apple's checklist of simple and
 easy-to-remember steps of service training, the initial letters of which spell out APPLE:
  Approach customers with a personalized warm welcome.
  Probe politely to understand all the customers' needs.
  Present a solution for the customers to take home.
  Listen for and resolve any issues or concerns.
  End with a fond farewell and an invitation to return.
 We'll discuss the power of checklists more in the "Execution" section of the book. In the meantime,
if you're experiencing some drama, maybe a simple checklist will help.
   To conclude, the strength of your People comes from the right leadership doing the right things right
      (FACe); and the right systems and processes supporting these people to keep the business flowing
       (PACe). With the combination of the right FACe and the right PACe, you have the key people and
process ingredients for a great company.







57

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

THE TEAM
Attracting and Hiring




  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Attracting and hiring A Players, at all levels of the organization, is as critical
  as landing the right customers. This requires the active participation of the marketing function in the recruiting
 process and the use of Topgrading methodology in the interviewing and selection process. With both, detailed in
  this chapter, your company will have a huge pool of candidates from which to choose enough "strange" people
 (who fit your differentiated strategy and culture) to scale up the business.

  NOTE: The cost of a bad hire is 15x his or her annual salary, according to Topgrading, so it's important
  to get the recruiting and selection process right



 scour the country for a financial whiz who knew the grocery industry wasn't going to cut it.
      Nash founded MOM's in 1987, at age 22, as a home delivery and mail order company based in his
   mother's garage in Maryland. It has a unique culture, built around the company's Purpose: to protect
    and restore the environment. Now a chain of 11 stores with 700 employees, MOM's is willing to walk
  away from potential sales to stick with its core commitment. For instance, it bans the sale of plastic
    water bottles in its stores. So MOM's challenge was recruiting a top-notch CFO willing to embrace
 the spirit of the company's Purpose while navigating the financial trade-offs required to "live" it.

      Gene Browne, who founded Galway-based The City Bin Co. in 1997, was facing a similar challenge
      recruiting people to work on the back of his garbage trucks and then keeping them. Though his
       business was recognized as one of the Best Managed Companies in Ireland by Deloitte for four
       consecutive years — from 2009 to 2012 — and won Deloitte's Gold Standard Award in 2012, CEO
  Browne still couldn't easily attract and hold on to employees to sling garbage cans. It's a dirty and
 physically demanding job requiring an early start in the morning.

 Follow along as we share how Nash, Browne, and other leaders recruit and hire tough-to-find talent.

 Get The Best Talent

 Before starting your search for a key executive or frontline associate, create a Job Scorecard (vs. the
 standard job description). A Job Scorecard details a person's purpose for the job, the desired outcomes
 of this individual's work, and the competencies — technical and cultural -— required to execute it. This
   tool is part of Topgrading, a methodology for hiring A Players, co-created by Brad and Geoff Smart.

                                                                  59

---

Scaling Up

  We consider it the best interviewing and                                    - Sample Job Scorecard -
selection system available. It has a proven
  track record of helping leaders hire the
right person more than 90% of the time          Position:                     Inside Sales Representative
 vs. the 25% to 60% success rates achieved      Location:                     Chicago, IL
  with "feel-good" conversations, testing       Mission:
                                                T c issn he s Sa Rentativ s c evom nenexistcst.
  or standard behavior-based interviewing

approaches. And considering the costs of         l   .
making a bad hire, it pays to get this pro-     Accountabilities                         Metric                   Rating    Comments
cess right.                                     Generate revenue                 $15,000monthly withn 3 monts    (A,B.C)
                                                                                 $40,000 monthly within 12 months
An A Player, by the Smarts' definition, is      Average sale size                $4,000+ within 12 months
                                                Customer volume                   Closes sales with at least 4
  someone in the top 10% of the available                                         C
                                                                                  Closes sales with at least 10
talent pool who is willing to accept your                                         C
                                                Activity tracked by copetion of   months
                                                                                 50 cold calls per day
specific offer. Read that definition again.     daily activity sheets)           5 scheduled sales presentation
                                                                                  phone appointments per day
                                                                                 At least 10 proposals sent per week
They are not implying that you have to          Documentation                    Completes all necessary
                                                                                 documentation on time
pay beyond what your business model can         Key Competencies
sustain. They do mean that you need to          Integrity                                                      Listening
attract the largest and most capable talent     Results-Oriented                                               Energy/Drive
pool excited about the job and willing to       Excellence                                                     Work Ethic
                                                            Customer Focus                                     Go al Setting
accept your compensation package (e.g.,                    Resourcefulness
 McDonald's has the same chances of hiring
A Players as Goldman Sachs), and have the
tools to select the best people from this group of prospects. The Job Scorecard is the starting point.

A central element of a Job Scorecard is the handful of specific and measurable outcomes that a po-
tential hire needs to accomplish over the coming one to three years. While a job description tends to
list what people will be doing (e.g., coaching sales reps, building client relationships), a Job Score-
card describes the outcomes you want from such activities ($8 million in revenue, seven new S&P
500 clients, a 100% contract renewal rate among the customers the trash collector serves). This is a
critical distinction between the job description (hope you've not wasted time creating these) and the
Topgrading Job Scorecard.

Being specific about outcomes allows you to directly evaluate each candidate's capacity to actually
deliver these results. Can you really see the person you're interviewing taking your top line from
$20 million to $35 million over the next three years? Is there anything in her history of results that
supports this conclusion? (For more practical insights about building Job Scorecards, read Bluewire
Media's excellent blog on the topic.)

Another central element is the list of candidate competencies that align with your culture and strategy.
As experienced leaders discover, it's more important to hire for this kind of fit than for specific skills,
so long as a person has the capacity to learn and grow (though it's best if you can find someone who's
a match in both cultural values and skill set). The rapidly changing requirements of most professions
require a constant updating of skills, anyway. On the other hand, cultures are like immune systems
and will spit out very capable people who don't align with its norms (Core Values).

60

---

                                                                                  The Team

  In addition to seeking culture fit, it is critical to hire people who can deliver on the Brand Promises
    and activities underpinning your strategy (see "The 7 Strata of Strategy" chapter). The City Bin Co.
   looks for garbage collectors who possess the competencies to deliver on its customer service promise.
 Southwest Airlines needs flight attendants who can deliver on its Brand Promise of "Lots of Fun."

  These central elements of the Job Scorecard — the outcomes and competencies — drive the recruiting,
 interviewing, and selection process.

 The Best Hires

        Good managers play checkers while great managers play chess, according to researchers Marcus
   Buckingham and Curt Coffman, authors of First, Break All the Rules: What the World's Greatest Managers
    Do Differently. In checkers, the pieces all move in the same way, whereas in chess, the pieces move
  differently, allowing you to bring different strengths to the game.

  In scaling up the people side of your business, it's crucial that you start playing chess sooner rather
     than later. Think of "The A-Team" of action television fame — a ragtag group of renegades bringing
   their individual and unique talents, personalities, and strengths together to act on the side of good!

     You, too, need a team of absolute specialists — chess pieces — to achieve your ambitious goals. In
    our experience, the learning curve for well-rounded generalists (checker pieces) is simply too long
    and too steep in today's fast and complex world. This is why we encourage leaders to look for "idiot
    savants" (i.e., people who are extremely talented at one particular thing and possibly quite bad at
      others). As Geoff Smart points out, "You would not let your family-practice doctor perform open-
      heart surgery on you." Teams need to be well-rounded, but their individual members don't have to
     be. Leaders don't always grasp this, which explains why the traditional "feel-good" interview has
     such a high failure rate. We have a tendency to hire people most like ourselves and end up with a
    company of look-alikes vs. tapping the diversity of talent, backgrounds, and personalities needed to
drive the fruitful debate, innovation, and differentiation that powers growth.

       Daniel M. Cable goes one step further and suggests you hire people who are downright strange.
   Author of Change to Strange: Create a Great Organization by Building a Strange Workforce (a book that
     we strongly suggest you read), Cable notes, "If your competitive advantage depends on your people
    creating something valuable and distinctive, then your workforce can't be normal." Therefore, if you
      want to have a differentiated strategy, you can't hire, compensate, and have the same HR systems
supporting the same people as your competition.

  UI NOTE: You need a "strange" culture and a "strange" strategy to differentiate your firm in the mar-
  ketplace. This is why it's so critical to discern the real Core Values underpinning your culture; and
     create the elements of an industry-dominating strategy. (How to do both is detailed in the "Strategy'
  section of this book.) With these values and strategic attributes, you can then generate Job Scorecards,
  as described above, and use them to identify the right "strange" people to hire.


61

---

 Scaling Up

 Recruiting Is a (Guerilla) Marketing Function

     The best people to consider first are those with whom you have already worked. Culture fit can be
     evaluated in interviews and tests, but nothing substitutes for your own real-time observations of
 someone over prolonged periods of time.

   However, most growing firms will exhaust such lists fairly quickly, so you will need clever ways to
  attract a sufficient applicant pool of specialists who fit your culture. Research strongly suggests that
     you need a minimum of 20 applicants per position (frontline to senior) if you want to dramatically
  increase your odds of hiring A Players. Sadly, because of the stress that comes with growth, many lead-
   ers simply hire whoever comes along and can fog the mirror (e.g., "You're breathing. You're hired!").

   This is why marketing is such a critical function to scaling up a business. The marketing team must be
 as actively involved in recruiting a steady stream of potential employees as it is in attracting potential
   customers, yet most organizations fail miserably in this area. They think the perfect candidates will
      fall from the sky. The best candidates are probably working somewhere else and need a reason to
      consider your organization. And because budgets are always tight in growing firms, you must find
 clever marketing approaches to attract the specific kind of "strange" talent you're seeking.

                                                           One of the classic recruiting campaigns was
                                                         launched by Google in its early years. A sin-
 first 10-digit prime found  .com                         gle billboard (placed near Yahoo's headquar-
 in consecutive digits of                                 ters — "Fish where there are fish"), with no
                                                            mention of the company, simply displayed a
                                                          sophisticated math riddle. The mere intrigue
           CLEARCHANNEL                                 of the billboard generated millions of dollars
                                                         of free publicity as the technorati went nuts
                                                         over the question of who placed the ad. This,
                                                          in turn, exposed the ad to tens of thousands
                                        of potential hires.
  The actual solution to the puzzle led to a series of websites with additional equations to solve. Even-
   tually, Google identified itself as the author of the billboard and said: "One thing we learned while
 building Google is that it's easier to find what you're looking for if it comes looking for you. What
 we're looking for are the best engineers in the world. And here you are.'

      This kind of guerilla marketing is within any company's reach. Atlassian, an Australian software
 company, hired 15 developers after it toured 15 European cities with a flashy bus that bore this mes-
sage in large letters: "Europe, we're coming to steal your geeks" — generating loads of free publicity
        as news agencies reported on the unusual bus tour. Employment Group, a Michigan staffing firm,
  invited the local business journal to cover its quarterly meetings themed around various rock bands.
  This landed the company several fun articles and resulted in a score of unsolicited quality résumés.
 It is easy to stand out if you use whatever approach fits your culture and you show some originality.


 62

---

                                                                                       The Team

 MOM's Goes Fishing
   To find the ideal CFO candidate for MOM's Organic Market, rather than advertise on job boards
    or in the local Washington Post, CEO Nash cast a line where those mostly likely interested in his
 company's Purpose tend to hang out. He placed an ad for a CFO on Treehugger.com, a green-living
    and environmental news site. The ad asked questions chosen to help the company attract a financial
    pro who fit into the culture of MOM's: Do you want to work for a David, rather than a Goliath? Are
     you an entrepreneur in a CPA's body? Would you rather come to work in jeans? (To read a copy of
 the full ad, go to scalingup.com.)
    Bingo! MOM's received 40 résumés in a week from a group of great candidates who clearly understood
     and appreciated the company's Purpose. Ultimately, Nash hired Kelly Moler, who had the requisite
   talent and shared the team's green values. Eight years later, she has helped the profitable company
     navigate the challenges of growing to $130 million in annual revenue amid competition from giant
 players like Whole Foods.
      MOM's has taken a similar approach to attract candidates in a variety of other positions, from
  grocery baggers to executive-level jobs. For instance, on the "Join us" page on its website, a recent
 advertisement said:
You:
  •are really interested in electric vehicles
  •appreciate a good debate, even with your boss
  • figure out how to fix it instead of who's to blame
  paid for your own stuff when you were a teenager
 have pulled recyclables out of the trash
We:
 work to protect and restore the environment
 like real food
  •aren't afraid to make mistakes
 •care more about your intelligence and values than your experience

      The ads have helped the company save time and money on attracting and retaining talent. "Ten years
  ago or so, before we did a lot of this stuff, people were churning in and out," recalls Nash. The typical
        candidate, he says, "was someone who wanted a paycheck. MOM's was a stepping-stone for people
     to go someplace better." Since MOM's tailored its recruitment strategy to its core culture, he says,
    "retention rates have just skyrocketed. It seems to be easier to hire people and find people." The ad,
he notes, "is an example of how we give our company culture and value a high priority.'
     Appletree Answers, whose success in tackling employee turnover we'll discuss in "The Core" chapter,
  typically receives 500 to 600 applicants for every open call-center position it has — attributable to its
                                                                                       63

---

 Scaling Up

                                                reputation as a great place to work. Austin-based Rackspace Hosting, a longtime Rockefeller Habits
                                                   practitioner, received 52,000 applicants for 569 openings in 2013, blowing away the recommended
  20:1 ratio — again, driven by a stellar reputation. Rackspace has made Fortune's list of the 100 Best
  Companies to Work For four years in a row (climbing to #29 in 2014) and counting.
                                                  NOTE: Given that even Harvard's record-low acceptance rate for the Class of 2017 was 5.8% (2,029
                                          admissions out of 35,023 applicants), it's been noted that it's harder to get a job at Rackspace than to
   get accepted into an Ivy League school!
                                              Making it onto Best Places to Work lists, even local ones in your region or city, is a clear sign of
                                                      an attractive workplace that will draw applicants to your company. A book written by the CEO
                                                (something we strongly recommend); a regular column in the local biz journal; a popular blog; and/
                                                  or regular LinkedIn Influencer posts are great recruiting (and marketing) tools and ways to grab
 attention in an industry.
                                                       The City Bin Co.'s Gene Browne was winning similar workplace awards and garnering excellent
                                              local attention, yet he needed to get creative in attracting the right people to work on the back of
his garbage trucks. Hearing Dan Cable, author of Change to Strange, speak at a Young Presidents
 Organization program at London Business School, Browne wondered:
   1.How can we expect our employees to be extraordinary and differentiate the company if we
   use the same hiring and onboarding methods as competitors?
   2What characteristics describe our ideal workforce that our competitors could not or would
   not use to describe theirs?
For Browne to try to differentiate his waste collection company through service is tricky, since the
people working on the back of the trucks are the ones who can make or break a service experience.
Yet shortly after Dan's lecture, something "strange" happened. A young man named Gary Manogue
applied for a back-of-the-truck job because (a) he saw it as a
       chance to do part of his daily workout while also being paid                         the city bin ce
   and (b) the early start and finish times suited his lifestyle. Gary       GET PAID
was a competitive kickboxer and had ambitions to win a world                 WHILE YOU
     title fight. He needed to train as many hours a day as possible.
        In December 2013, Gary became the world super welterweight           WORK OUT!
               kickboxing champion. In a pre-fight interview, the Galway
Advertiser noted:                                                            Now Hiring     IDEAL FOR
                                                                             nfor Driver's   ATHLETES
     "This is Manogue's first seven-round fight and he has prepared with     Assistants
       a fitness regime that involves an eight-kilometre run every morn-     And that's exactly what World Super Welterweight
         ing, work-out in the gym in the evening, and in between working     Kickboxin Champion Gary Manogue did. He joined
                                                                             The City Bin Co. team to maximise his training schedule.
   for The City Bin Co. 'Running after bins keeps me pretty fit too,          This is Manogue's first seven-round fight and he has prepared with a
  he says."                                                                       .
                                                                                .
                                                                              Galwoy
                                                                              A etiser
              Based on this chance situation, The City Bin Co. has since    Please apply to careers@citybin.com with
developed a hiring campaign aimed at unemployed young men                    the words 'Driver's Assistants' in the subject line
                                                                             www.citybin.com
64

---

                                                                    The Team

  (no shortage of these in Ireland) who are big into fitness, asking, "Would you like to be paid for
      your daily workout?" The company is advertising in local gyms and letting word-of-mouth do the
     rest. These young men do not perceive the job in the same way as the typical young person who is
  handing out CVs looking for a job.
      Lik MOM's and The ity Bin Co., many growh companies realize that to achieve their goals, they
   need the right people on the bus. But in many industries, these folks aren't just waiting at the bus
   stop. And you won't find them solely by advertising on job boards. The key to finding them, as Nash,
    Browne, and others have discovered, is by creating a recruitment strategy that reflects your Core
   Values and Purpose and then using your marketing skills to reach the right potential pool of talent.

  The Topgrading Interview
    Once you have attracted a large number of qualifed candidates, which significantly increases your
  chances of fnding A Players, a rock-solid evaluation process (not your gut feeling) is needed to bring
   the numbers down from 20 to 10, then to three, and finally to the one top candidate who will deliver
 150% of your Job Scorecard.
 At MOM's, the online job application asks questions such as "What companies do you admire?"
 to get a sense of a candidate's values. "That gets us to a place where we know what is important to
 them," says Nash. The company also asks why applicants are interested in MOM's. "Some people
 say they want to work for MOM's because we're in a booming industry. They want job security and
 some money. That's okay, but it has nothing to do with our values."
These gatekeeper questions, along with various online tests we recommend — Assess Systems' wide
range of pre-employment tests and OMG's Sales Assessments among them — are very helpful in
narrowing your long list to the final five or 10 candidates.
At this point, it's time to interview. And as mentioned above, the process we recommend is Top-
grading. For an excellent overview, read Geoff Smart and Randy Street's book Who: The A Method
  for Hiring; to learn the details of the process, read Bradford D. Smart's book Topgrading: The Proven
       Hiring and Promoting Method That Turbocharges Company Performance. We also recommend that at
    companies doing regular hiring, at least one person become a Certified Master Practitioner through
an online course at scalingup.com that includes several hours of video instruction by Brad Smart;
interaction with other practitioners; and one-on-one coaching with one of Smart's certified trainers.
The Topgrading methodology includes a screening interview used to further narrow your list from 10
to the top three candidates. This interview consists of five powerful screening interview questions.
They work for any position for which you're hiring and can be addressed in 30 to 45 minutes over
the phone or in a short meeting.
Once you're down to the top three candidates, it's time for the Chronological In-Depth Structured
(CIDS) interview — a thorough three- to four-hour interview covering a candidate's entire career
history, with the objective of discovering behavioral and performance patterns that are likely to
                                                                    65

---

 Scaling Up

 repeat themselves at your workplace. When hiring, bear in mind that past performance is the best
 indicator of future performance.

 The length of this interview offers several benefits:
  1. A Players like a vigorous process and are leery of companies that make it too easy.
  2. "Professional" interviewees can't keep up the façade for hours.
  3. Meanwhile, those who are not initially comfortable will have time to relax and open up.
  4.Besides, what's three to four hours now vs. thousands of hours of headaches if you hire the
  wrong person?
  NOTE: A three- to four-hour interview is appropriate for a middle or senior leader; one to two hours
       might be more suitable for entry-level or less experienced candidates with limited work history.
  While Topgrading was initially designed for senior executives at General Electric, it works at all levels.
     Speed Wire, a cabling contractor headquartered on Long Island, grew from 25 employees to 325 (mainly
  technicians) in one year, relying on Topgrading to make sure all its hires were A Players. Kevin Donnelly,
      founder of Speed Wire (now a MasTec company), was thrilled with the results. "We can't believe the
caliber of people it has helped us hire. We couldn't have done it without Topgrading," he says.

       At MOM's, Nash will lead the three- to four-hour Topgrading interviews with candidates for major
        positions, like successful CFO candidate Kelly Moler, while MOM's managers will do abbreviated
      interviews with other employees. "It's the most effective method I've come across," says Nash. The
       company will go through each candidate's entire work history, as recommended, and ask questions
      about whom they reported to at each job — including the spelling of that boss's name, to show that
    the company is serious about checking references. A typical follow-on question is, "What will so-and-
      so say about you?" "It's a real truth serum," says Nash. (This process is called TORC — Threat of
      Reference Check — in the Topgrading methodology. It works!) Interviewers will also ask candidates
     to discuss a time that they had to deal with a difficult boss or when someone said something painful
 to them. "We're looking for people who receive candor well," says Nash.

 Check for Culture Fit

As emphasized earlier, MOM's has customized the interview to its values. Nash believes that people
      who had to earn money for themselves as teenagers tend to be well-grounded, so the questions might
      include: "What did you spend money on as a teenager? How did you get that money?" (Hint to future
       candidates: You will not impress the team at MOM's by saying your parents gave you a $100-a-week
   allowance.) An interviewer might also ask questions like: "Do you discuss religion and politics with
        people? When was your last passionate debate? Who was it with? And what was it about? How did
    it turn out?" "If the answer to the last question was, 'I'll never respect that person again,' we know
the person isn't open to different ideas," says Nash.

 Checking for culture fit in the interview process can be handled in a variety of ways. At Southwest
Airlines, for example, if people don't get the team's omnipresent jokes, it's clear that the airline is

66

---

                                                                                 The Team

   not the right place for them. Commerce Bank first screens for people smiling while waiting to be
     interviewed. At online apparel retailer Zappos, administrative assistants always handle part of the in-
     terviewing and testing, even for C-suite candidates. If a candidate seems irritated at being interviewed
   by lower-level employees, he probably lacks one of Zappos' Core Values, which is being humble.

   Test-Drive Potential Employees
       Though it's not always possible, the best way to select the right people is to have candidates work
        with you for several weeks. For frontline hires, temp-to-perm placement firms are popular because
       they allow you to test-drive candidates. For management hires, see if they can work with you in the
   evenings on a consulting basis. The founders of Google appointed Eric Schmidt chairman of the
   board of directors four months before making him CEO.
         Zappos requires all new hires, no matter what the position (executive, programmer, marketer), go
       through a four-week training program that includes extensive time working in its call center serving
      customers. During this trial period, they offer these newbies a $3,000 bonus (besides their salary for
       the month) if they quit, guaranteeing that only those who really want to work at Zappos stay. Since
         acquiring Zappos, Amazon has adopted something similar for fulfllment-center workers called Pay
 to Quit. In an employee's first year of work, the offer is $2,000. It goes up by $1,000 every year after
      that until it hits $5,000. The idea, writes Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos in his 2014 letter to shareholders,
       is "to encourage folks to take a moment and think about what they really want. In the long run, an
  employee staying somewhere they don't want to be isn't healthy for the employee or the company."

   Will, Values, Results, Skill
 It's important to hire the best A Player you can find for each position in your company based on four
  criteria (in this order!):
     Will — a desire to excel, act with courage, persevere, learn, and innovate
     Values — the test for culture fit - do they align with your core values
    Results — in the end can they deliver on your KPIs/outcomes
    Skills — the least important since most skill-sets need updated every 5 years
 Doing so builds an internal momentum and strength that pays dividends for years. You hire the right
 people and life is great; you hire the wrong people (fit) and life is miserable.
In the next chapter, we'll look at the leadership and people systems that Nash, Browne, and other
leaders use to keep and grow this talent.





67

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

   5
   THE MANAGERS (COACHES)
   Keeping and Growing
   (Educating) the Team


                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Once you've hired your team members, it takes great managers to keep them
        happy and engaged. Failing to develop these managers throughout the organization can become a major growth
barrier. We identify five critical activities that distinguish great managers and the routines they use to educate
                 ther people—and we sggest that the term"anager"be replaced with the word "coach,"whic moreacctely
         describes the role. We'll also share hard evidence that investments in training and coaching (vs. R&D and
    capital expenditures) provide you with the best returns available to your business.


                  eople join companies. They leave managers. Therefore, to keep your team happy and engaged,
             you need one thing above all else: great managers — not free lunches or yoga classes! As Gallup
     notes, "Managers account for at least 70% of variance in employee engagement scores." And great
     managers are not just born; they are continually advancing their skills and those of their employees.
     As the business scales to more than 100 employees, reaching a critical point at which everyone doesn't
     know everyone else's name, it becomes crucial for the leadership team to build a capable team of
     middle managers (coaches). As mentioned earlier in the book, failure to develop sufficient leadership
    is one of the three biggest barriers to growth.

     Keep Your Talent Engaged
    So what does a great manager do to keep a company's team happy and engaged? To answer this
    question, Google applied its data analytics capability, led by a "people analytics team," to bring the
    same level of rigor to People-decisions that it does to engineering challenges. What the data showed
    is that periodic one-on-one coaching (rather than superior technical knowledge) ranked as the #1
     key to being a successful leader.
    From our experience, great managers must focus those coaching sessions with their "direct supports"
    (a better term than "direct reports") on five topics representing the five main activities of successful
    managers. In reverse order of importance:



    69

---

Scaling Up

  5. Hire fewer people, but pay them more.
  4.Give recognition, and show appreciation.
  3. Set clear expectations, and give employees a clear line of sight.
  2.Don't demotivate; "dehassle."
  Help people play to their strengths.
Let's look at each of these activities in detail.

 5. Hire less; higher pay.
Daniel H. Pink, in his best-selling book Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us, shows
 why compensation is a lot less effective as a motivational tool than we thought. Extrinsic motivators
("carrots and sticks") have been overrated and become less effective in a world that needs more and
more well-educated, right-brain knowledge workers. And people will sacrifice certain perks to work
with a firm with a worthy Purpose that's making a difference.
Does that make compensation irrelevant? Of course not! If companies aren't competitive, it becomes
challenging for them to attract and keep the best talent. When MOM's finds great people, at every
level, it pays them more than the industry average. For instance, the company's minimum wage is
$11 an hour, higher than that in its home state of Maryland, which was $7.25 an hour as this book
 went to press.
The key to affording higher wages (we're talking frontline employees, not senior leadership) is a lower
total wage cost as a percent of revenue. You have to remain competitive, and the best companies know
that one great person can replace three good ones. Through rigorous selection (i.e., Topgrading), they
get the absolute best talent in the door, pay employees above-market rates, and then invest heavily
in training and development to make them more productive.
Take storage-product retailer The Container Store, which has been named to the Fortune list of Best
Companies to Work For 14 years in a row (and counting!). Its Foundational Principle #1 is "1 Equals
3" — one great person equals three good people in terms of business productivity. "We have to be
selective when interviewing potential employees because of the Brand Promise we've made to our
customers to provide exceptional customer service," notes the company's website. As a result, the
Texas-based chain hires only about 3% of all who apply. In turn, the company says, it pays salespeople
as much as 50% to 100% more than the retail industry average, and provides 263 hours of training
to all first-year full-time employees, compared to an industry average of seven hours. To paraphrase
what the co-founders said when they launched their innovative retail concept, "Do we want a whole
bunch of low-paid dumb folk; or would we rather have a whole lot fewer, better-paid smart folk?"
 Costco pays its employees roughly 70% more per hour than Sam's Club, yet needs almost 40% fewer
 employees per dollar of revenue. And with a 6% employee turnover after one year vs. 21% for Sam's,
Costco saves a tremendous amount on recruiting, training, and development. In general, competing
on low labor and training costs is a slippery road and usually not sustainable.
70

---

                                                                 The Managers (Coaches)

       And if you think this pattern holds only for low-wage jobs: Goldman Sachs pays its employees an
    average compensation package almost twice as big as the competition's, yet it has fewer than half the
       number of employees on a per-revenue basis and almost three times the profit per employee. Again
 fewer people, paid more, with higher productivity.

      How you structure the compensation — variable vs. fixed — should fit your culture. If your culture
          emphasizes rugged individualism, like Nordstrom, you might want to have a high-commission/
       bonus-based compensation plan driven by internal competition among employees. Given the culture
       of teamwork at The Container Store and its emphasis on customer service, paying store employees
a straight (and high) hourly wage without commissions makes      "Don't copy somebody else's
sense. Look to your Core Values, your business model, and your
 Brand Promise, and let them instruct you in the design of your  compensation system."
 compensation plan. Don't copy somebody else's system.

       Last, when it comes to the key people who absolutely drive performance, great managers simply do
 whatever it takes to keep them on board, including offering a customized compensation package. If
      one person wants less base and more incentive-based pay, so be it. If another wants more time off,
     let it happen. "Fairness" does not mean "sameness." You need to be creative and flexible in order to
keep your top talent happy, from a compensation-package perspective.
      Wages are one of your biggest expenses and should be used strategically to differentiate your firm
       from the competition, as in the examples above (and the Outback Steakhouse "X-Factor" example in
      "The 7 Strata of Strategy" chapter). Purchasing a compensation comparison study and paying people
the same as everyone else will relegate the company to the heap of average firms.

 4. Give recognition and show appreciation.

      "The deepest principle of human nature is the craving to be appreciated," wrote William James, the
     father of American psychology. It is impossible to be motivated and do great work if you don't feel
 that somebody cares and appreciates what you do.

   Studies have shown that for people to be happy and productive at work, they need to experience positive
 interactions (appreciation, praise) vs. negative (reprimands, criticism) with their manager in a ratio of at
 least 3:1. (Watch out: For a marriage to work, you actually need a 5:1 ratio!!) So make it a simple habit to
    thank people each and every day — and that includes using the word generously in emails to your team.

   The way people want to receive recognition varies greatly: public vs. private, material vs. immaterial,
      from peers vs. from superiors, etc. Great managers test different approaches and observe reactions
until they find the triggers that work best with each of their people. At MOM's Organic Market,
         managers will sometimes publicly recognize employees who have performed well, but CEO Scott
Nash has often found that one-on-one comments are most effective.

To get ideas on how to create a culture of recognition and appreciation, see Chip Conley's excellent
book Peak: How Great Companies Get Their Mojo from Maslow, Chapter 5.

                                                                                      71

---

 Scaling Up

3. Set clear expectations and provide a line of sight.
 Great managers explain how their people's work contributes to the greater objectives of the com-
pany and then help them align their individual priorities with those of the firm. This is what Jack
Stack, author of the book The Great Game of Business: The Only Sensible Way to Run a Company,
calls "line of sight," an important concept to create engagement and a sense of purpose. Can your
employees explain how what they're doing helps deliver on your company's purpose, strategy, and
 Brand Promise?
Once people understand their role and contribution, great managers set clear and consistent ex-
pectations about the outcomes of their team's work. By defining the what and not the how, great
managers give employees the autonomy to find their own way of achieving these goals. Feeling the
liberty to figure things out for themselves and apply their own style is very important for people
since autonomy is one of three main drivers of human motivation, as Dan Pink explains in Drive.
Many managers struggle with defining adequate and measurable targets for their people. Gazelles'
execution planning methodology and the One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP), detailed in the "Strategy'
and "Execution" sections of the book, will help. Specifically, column 7 of the OPSP provides space
 to define for each quarter:
  1.KPIs — Two to three key performance indicators that objectively signal people on whether
   they had a productive day or week. At MOM's, says Nash, the company will explain what
   these measures are — for instance, there might be a particular sales goal for a section of the
   store — and then tell a manager: "Here's the goal. You have to figure out how to get there,
   either on your own or with others' help." Nash adds, "If they don't meet KPIs, we sit down
   with them right away and get a plan.
  2. Priorities — A handful for the next quarter needed to achieve the Critical Number and
   improve on a KPI.
  3. Critical Number - The main bottleneck that each employee or team must fix during
   the quarter.
Defining these individual outcomes in the context of the OPSP assures alignment with the company's
strategy and its long- and short-term goals.

 2. Stop demotivating; start "dehassling."
The best managers are less concerned about motivating their people and more concerned about
 NOT demotivating them. They consider it their job to prevent the hassles that block their team's
 performance. Such demotivators are usually related to issues with people or processes.
 The #1 demotivator for talented people is having to put up with bozos, as Steve Jobs would call them.
Nothing is more frustrating for A Players than having to work with B and C Players who slow them
down and suck their energy. In that sense, "The best thing you can do for employees — a perk better
than foosball or free sushi — is hire only 'A' players to work alongside them. Excellent colleagues
72

---

                                                                                  The Managers (Coaches)

      trump everything else," explains Patty McCord, former chief talent officer at Netflix, in a recent
  Harvard Business Review article.

  Fixing people issues for your team can also mean "firing" a client. Unreasonable clients who mistreat
      your employees and disrupt your business can become an important energy drain. Firing such clients
     can gain the manager huge respect internally. The negative financial impact is usually counteracted
  by the immediate rise in the spirits and productivity of your team.
       On the process side, do your people have the appropriate tools and resources they need to get the
          job accomplished? Are there lame policies and procedures frustrating your team? Do you need to
      bring in a Lean expert to help your people design new processes or streamline existing ones? Where
           might they be spinning their wheels because of unnecessary delays? Focus on ways to make your
  team's job(s) easier — a great definition of an effective manager.
        To reinforce this servant leadership approach, Fathom, a digital marketing agency from Cleveland
      and an exemplary Rockefeller Habits practitioner, started using "direct supports" (as in: the man-
    ager supports his people) instead of "direct reports" (as in: the people report to the manager) when
 referencing a manager's team. We like this twist and hope it spreads.

  1. Help people play to their strengths.
      What ultimately sets great managers apart from the merely good ones is that they help their people
 play to their strengths. To understand how to do this requires a refined definition of what constitutes
  a strength. A strength isn't just something you're good at; it's only a strength if it literally gives you
     strength, gives you energy (think about the fitness fanatics whom The City Bin Co. is hiring to work
     on the back of its garbage trucks!). In turn, a weakness, is something that, though you may be good
at it, drains the life out of you.
  Thus, a key function of great managers is helping individual employees refocus and prune their jobs
  over time so they focus more on activities that give them strength and less on activities that make
   them weak. Though there will always be parts of anyone's job that are draining, the companies that
do better at minimizing these will have a more energized team.
  Coming back to the chess vs. checkers analogy used earlier, Bobby Fischer, the great chess champion,
  once said, "Winning in this game is all a matter of understanding how to capitalize on the strengths
of each piece and timing their moves just right."
    Lois Melbourne, CEO of Texas-based Aquire (a subsidiary of PeopleFluent), has taken a page from
    strengths guru Marcus Buckingham. Instead of hiring more (and extremely difficult-to-find) pro-
grammers to keep up with the rapid growth of her HR software firm, she's focused on making her
existing programmers happier and more energized.
   To do this, Buckingham suggests taking a couple of weeks and documenting all those activities you
    either love or loathe. This is precisely what Melbourne has her programmers do regularly, noting
                                                                      73

---

Scaling Up

  all of the activities that drain their energy and keep these techies away from their primary strength:
  programming. She then eliminates those activities no one should have to do (they creep into every job)
  and then uses the remaining list to create a Job Scorecard for a new position — to be filled by a new
 chess piece that loves to do what others hate. Result: happier, more productive, and loyal programmers.
    Whenever you have a department scream for more help, rather than throw more of the same people at
 the situation, try Buckingham's approach. And before starting the "love and loathe" exercise, have your
team take the inexpensive online StrengthsFinder assessment offered by Gallup (gallupstrengthscenter.com).
    You will get insightful reports that will serve as conversation-starters and will help your people
achieve self-awareness about their strengths.
     Facebook's celebrity COO Sheryl Sandberg recently called Buckingham's follow-up book with Donald
  O. Clifton, Now, Discover Your Strengths, the most important book she had read in recent years. In her
   view, Facebook is already a strengths-based organization. If you want to follow Facebook's example,
     go to tmbc.com and get Buckingham's six-DVD series titled Trombone Player Wanted. Then organize
a learning session with your team and discuss how to become a strengths-based organization. These
remarkably produced mini-movies will have a profound impact on everyone in your company.
      Finding employees' strengths and focusing workers on those assets is the most powerful people-
management tool we can suggest. And it goes hand in hand with dehassling a person's job. Embracing
    strengths-based management practices will bring you more fulfilled, happier, and engaged employees
who will lift themselves and your organization to new levels of energy and performance.
0CRITICAL: Don't forget to apply this to yourself. Focus on eliminating or delegating tasks that
  drain you. In Verne's case, he found someone who loves to build PowerPoint presentations, something
  that wears him out; and he continues to partner with various CEOs to run the Gazelles family of
  companies. This gives him more time to teach, which truly energizes him

Are You a Manager or a Leader?
     Ask a good manager about his team and he will speak in generalities, saying that they are hard-
     working, responsible, fun, etc. Ask a great manager the same question and she will describe each
     of her team members with specific details about their personality, strengths, and achievements.
Again, think about the "A-Team" action television analogy from the last chapter.
If you struggle with appreciating the differences in your team, you might be more of a leader than
       a manager. Managing is about differences; leading is about sameness. Great managers discover
   what is different about people and capitalize on it. Great leaders discover what is universal, build
      a common vision for a better future around it, and then rally people behind it. (Marcus Buck-
       ingham, this time in his book The One Thing You Need to Know ... About Great Managing, Great
    Leading, and Sustained Individual Success, explains this difference between managing and leading.)
       Companies can cope with a charismatic leader (who struggles with managing) until they get to
       about 50 employees. But as soon as you approach 100 or more people, you have to put in place
       a team of managers capable of adopting the five habits outlined above. Scaling up a business
requires both visionary leadership and great managers.
74

---

                                                       The Managers (Coaches)

                                            Grow Your Talent

      In 2012, Gene Browne, co-founder and CEO of The City Bin Co. in Galway, Ireland, decided to
      invest heavily in executive education. The company set up an internal learning academy named
    "Garbage University." It provides three hours of training every two weeks from September to May
  in sync with the academic year. Each year, Garbage University has a particular focus that shapes the
    topics that the executive team discusses. For instance, 2013 was about growth during a time when
the company grew nearly 100%, from 70 to 120 employees.

      At MOM's Organic Market, in addition to executive education, produce managers will typically
read four to five books together every year. Recent titles on their list include business books such as
    Liz Wiseman's Multipliers: How the Best Leaders Make Everyone Smarter and Patrick M. Lencioni's
  The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership Fable. Other titles help them absorb knowledge that's
specific to their field. One typical pick: Maria Rodale's Organic Manifesto. "We've read a lot of books
   on the organic industry," says Jon Croft, training director at the metro Washington-based company.

      In order to keep your company competitive and your people loyal, you must grow them through
  education and coaching. And this investment in people is the biggest single predictor of a company's
  ability to beat its direct competitors and the overall market, based on exhaustive research done by
Laurie Bassi, co-author of Good Company: Business Success in the Worthiness Era. Jack Welch, former
     CEO of General Electric, couldn't agree more. He declared that the ROI of GE's famous internal
business school, Crotonville, was "infinite."

Onboarding - Getting the First Impression Right

  One of the biggest opportunities to grow and align your people is when they first start working for
 you. Their initial weeks on the job represent a unique chance to create connection and deeply ingrain
    a company's DNA into new people. Yet few companies make proper use of this opportunity. Instead,
 the first days on the job often feel more like waterboarding than onboarding: no desk, no computer, no
  phone, the new boss is traveling, and the first assignment is shadowing an unenthusiastic colleague
for two weeks.

    Famous sales coach and dear friend Jack Daly suggests, "Why don't you throw people a party when
    they start, instead of when they leave?" Sydney-based software firm Atlassian sends each new em-
  ployee, whatever his or her position, to a resort spa the weekend before the start date as a way to
     celebrate the new job. The spouse or a guest gets to go along — making both new employees and
their spouses raving Atlassian fans.

      Why not have balloons suspended from her chair (Appletree Answers has a Herman Miller Aeron
   chair for each call center worker); a signed welcome card; and a celebration lunch with cake? Or,
    as Daly did for every new employee he hired, send a gift basket to his house/spouse, timed to be
  awaiting his arrival home after the first day on the job. Onboarding needs to be a celebration, not
     paperwork. It should create emotional connections between the new recruit and a maximum number
of team members.

                                                       75

---

 Scaling Up

 Formal Orientation

  To inculcate a new employee (bring her into the culture) properly, structure a formal orientation
  process. It's most effective when organized around doing real work while emphasizing the company's
  Values and Purpose. Zappos' four-week orientation has all new recruits work the call center phones
 as a way to understand the intense focus that the Las Vegas-based online apparel retailer places on
 customer service from the ground up.

 Boston-based global services company Sapient had one of our favorite orientation processes, launched
 back when co-founder J. Stuart Moore was running the company. It was a five-day "boot camp"
     designed by a former second-grade schoolteacher working at the company. She approached Moore
    when the organization passed the 70-employee mark and warned that the culture was starting to
   "leak" (this always happens when a company reaches about this number of employees). She designed
 the boot camp so all new recruits would spend a week working on a list of nagging internal projects
   that no one else wanted to tackle (good to have newbies!). And as they worked on these projects,
    one Core Value was reinforced each day, so by the end of the week, everyone understood in a real
 way the cultural and strategic approach Sapient preferred on all projects.

   Teams at this rapidly growing firm had been screaming that they needed more people in the field
  immediately. But they found that new recruits who went through the boot camp could hit the ground
  running at near 100% field-ready alignment, whereas before the orientation process was introduced,
    they had normally needed a frustrating six-month ramp-up period. Everyone became huge fans of
 the process as Sapient scaled up to 2,500 people.

    At Blinds.com, a Houston-based online retailer of window blinds and shades with 250 employees,
  orientation includes a scavenger hunt — an excuse to meet and greet the new colleagues and answer
   their questions about the company and its culture. Founder and CEO Jay Steinfeld then personally
 drives new recruits to a run-down alleyway in Houston where the company had its first office back in
   1996. There, he shares the history and Core Values of the company (which was acquired by The Home
 Depot in January 2014). The involvement of senior management in the onboarding process is critical.

     As Harvard professor Frances Frei and organization builder Anne Morriss remind leaders in their
 breakthrough strategy book Uncommon Service: How to Win by Putting Customers at the Core of Your
 Business, onboarding is like the imprinting that happens to birds immediately after hatching. (Re-
     member the mother hen vs. the farmer's boot?) People are exceptionally positive, receptive, and
 willing to learn in this phase, and they experience deep attachment to whatever you expose them to.
   So be careful about the kind of induction program you put in front of your "hatchlings." Dumping
a 200-page binder of company policies on their desks is probably not sending the right message.

All Growth Companies Are Training Companies

     At its 20th anniversary celebration, Poland-based AmRest Holdings' co-founder and chairman,
   Henry McGovern, looked back at how the restaurant holding company grew from its first Pizza Hut
    in Wroclaw to more than 18,000 employees with restaurant locations throughout Eastern Europe,
76

---

                                  The Managers (Coaches)

Russia, the US, and China. "We're more a training company than a restaurant company!" he said. In 2013,
AmRest invested 20,000 hours of training in Russia alone as it ramped up from two to 80 restaurants.
        The only way to grow a company is to grow the people first. Whether Jack Welch is committing $50
million to Crotonville, The Container Store is providing first-year associates with 263 hours of formal
training, or CJ Advertising in Nashville is paying employees to read industry-related materials from
its library, the best growth firms are, first and foremost, training companies.
Most professions and trades understand this. Commercial pilots, thankfully, are required to hone
their skills 60 hours per year in continuing education; doctors need to put in 45 to 60; embalmers and
       truck drivers must complete more than a dozen hours annually. Yet business professionals piloting
their companies aren't required to obtain a single hour. We're hoping to change this. We require our
Gazelles International Certified Coaches to commit to 45 hours of annual professional education to
keep their certification. And our more progressive clients, monitored by their CFOs, are starting to
require a specific number of hours of ongoing education at all levels of the organization (we suggest
12 hours for the frontline; 25 hours for middle management; and 45 to 60 hours for senior leaders
as a starting point).
Worried about spending all that money on training only to watch your people go elsewhere? The
research definitively shows that training and development increases loyalty. Besides, what's the
alternative? Do you really want your people not to be the best-trained for the jobs they have to do?
And how much should you spend on training? It obviously depends, but 2% to 3% of your payroll is
a good benchmark. Who should you spend it on? Senior leaders, middle managers, frontline employ-
ees? They all need training, but focus first on your middle management. In most growth companies,
they have the hardest jobs and are critical to employee engagement and retention, yet get the least
preparation for it.

Garbage University
At The City Bin Co., Browne, who had been a business school lecturer early in his career, facilitates
Garbage University, creating a formal syllabus, complete with homework assignments. Sometimes,
his leadership team reviews case studies from Harvard Business Review together. Other times, they
watch an on-demand video from Gazelles or review chapters of a business book together, looking
for valuable takeaways to grow the firm. "We have a discussion around what we can learn and apply
to our business," Browne says.
Browne prepares a syllabus to keep the program well-focused and on track. To give you an example
of how it works, one item on the syllabus in 2012 was "Social Media for Business." The executive
team looked at David Meerman Scott's lessons from the book The New Rules of Marketing & PR:
How to Use Social Media, Online Video, Mobile Applications, Blogs, News Releases, and Viral Marketing to
Reach Buyers Directly and watched several short YouTube videos that exemplified Scott's teachings.
The following week, City Bin's execs focused on improving their writing skills and did a refresher
on common mistakes in punctuation.
                                                                               77

---

 Scaling Up

  Other discussions have covered topics such as leadership, strategy, customer service, sales, scenario
  planning, and Tony Schwartz's principles of energy management.
  This isn't just a feel-good exercise. In its new partnership with Dubai-based Averda, where Browne
  sits on the Executive Committee, City Bin is laser-focused on expanding into emerging markets
  and needs its team to stay primed for new opportunities to expand, whether that is by licensing its
  software, franchising, or winning contracts with distant municipalities. "We don't necessarily have
  to collect waste from a million homes," says Browne. "We can be inside a million homes through our
  software." Having a team that is primed to tap into such opportunities will be crucial to City Bin's
  growth — and Browne knows they need to be prepared.

  Online Learning
  Longstanding clients like AmRest and City Bin are taking advantage of online education as well
       MOM's Organic Market frequently convenes members of its leadership team to watch webcasts on
  topics that will help them develop professionally and personally. It shows the videos every six to
  eight weeks in operations or other meetings. "It is a learning event incorporated into a meeting that
 has already been planned," says Croft, the training director.
   The company watches the 45- to 75-minute online seminars as a group and then has a regional general
     manager lead a 30- to 60-minute "reflective dialogue" on the program, says Croft. At one meeting
 in March 2014, managers in the produce area and a group of employees interested in becoming
     managers watched Malcolm Gladwell's video seminar Outliers: Why People Are Successful, available
 on demand at scalingup.com.

  grow ourselves and how we grow a business, and how we grow a unit within the business," explains Croft.
       MOM's actively encourages employees to apply what they have learned to their work. At the end
      of each discussion, employees are asked, "What is the one takeaway that you are going to commit
     yourself to working on?" Very recently, MOM's expanded its program to hourly workers; it has been
       airing an online video on The Happiness Advantage by Shawn Achor for hourly workers at some of
its stores on Sunday nights.
"Scott felt very passionately that we should figure out a way to incorporate more of our staf into
    these opportunities," says Croft. The training director, who has been leading the sessions with the
  hourly team, says the discussions have been "as good as — if not better and more energizing, passionate,
and exciting than — any of the ones I've led in the past year.'
Beyond providing a learning opportunity, The Happiness Advantage video has helped reinforce the
company's values. "As a company, we care deeply about being whole people," Croft says. "We care
deeply about having a wellness in our lives that includes our work lives, but also every other aspect
of our lives. We would like for all of us to figure out how to use The Happiness Advantage in our work,
but it's realy so much more than that. It's the ripple effect we can have on others.'
78

---

                                                                   The Managers (Coaches)

       As mentioned in the beginning of this section, MOM's also strongly encourages employees to set
       aside time for professional reading and has organized a vetting committee to find intriguing books
       for its leadership team to discuss. To make sure employees truly learn from each book, Croft might
     prepare a sheet asking managers to focus on takeaways on which they plan to act, and the five key
      points they want everyone at MOM's to know.
      With some books, the company will ask a member of the team to make a formal presentation on a
      specific chapter. "For Multipliers, we did some of the exercises Liz suggested in the book," Croft says.
       The managers got a lot out of that book. I think the process really helped solidify that."
      One book that has been a hit among Croft's team is The Weekly Coaching Conversation: A Business Fable
      About Taking Your Game and Your Team to the Next Level by Brian Souza.
     "Managers absolutely love that book and the conversations around that book," Croft says.
     Another that sparked passionate feedback was Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead, by
     Facebook's Sheryl Sandberg. A discussion among the leadership team that Croft expected would
     last two hours stretched to four, with the head of HR at MOM's furiously taking notes on poten-
     tial changes to make the company more family-friendly. As a result, CFO Kelly Moler decided to
     form a committee to work on such initiatives. "We are going to take a good look at our policies and
     procedures," says Croft.
     Meanwhile, Croft has planned another discussion of Lean In, including both women and men on the
    staff at the store level. "I believe there is a need to have that conversation not just with one gender
    or another," he says.
     All this learning is obviously paying off: MOM's continues its rapid growth while achieving four
     times industry average profitability in an industry not known for spending a lot on training and
    development.

      Growing People Through Coaching

     As Google's people analytics team discovered, one-on-one coaching is the #1 factor linked to great
     management. Again, this is why we've been quietly lobbying to get rid of the term "manager" and
     replace it with "coach" (e.g., sales coach vs. sales manager).
    The best framework for coaching is Ken Blanchard and Paul Hersey's concept of Situational Lead-
     ership. It guides leaders in how to mix the right amount of direction and support, depending on the
     competency and confidence of the person being coached.
          Based on this model, managers can move employees through a development cycle that reduces step
by step the need for direction and support until a task can be fully delegated. The style chosen in each
 phase needs to be based on the task at hand. While one task might require specific how-to instructions,
       another might call for only some encouragement or nothing at all. Read the short management fable

                                                                                                 79

---

 Scaling Up

  Leadership and the One Minute Manager: Increasing Effectiveness Through Situational Leadership, by Ken
     Blanchard, Patricia Zigarmi, and Drea Zigarmi, to gain more insight into this powerful coaching
 framework.

 But as with any tool, this model requires a rhythm of use to make it effective. This is where regularly
 scheduled one-on-one coaching conversations are helpful and can replace the dreaded quarterly or
 annual performance reviews (which are too far removed from the behaviors and results that need
 changing). Set a specific day each week or month, depending on the competence and maturity of the
 employee, and stick to it. Frequent canceling sends a message that it's not important. If it is monthly,
 an hour is appropriate; if it's weekly, then budget 20 to 30 minutes.

 Use these conversations to review individual KPIs, Priorities, and Critical Numbers from column 7
 of the OPSP at each meeting. Recognize good performance, analyze underperformance, and discuss
    activities needed to get back on track. Ask questions to put the focus on the process, rather than
 lamenting results. Also give feedback on adherence to Core Values and, if necessary, develop strategies
 to correct behavior. Don't hold back. Timely feedback is the most effective. It is easier to digest and
 prevents the formation of bad habits.

    Last, in order to grow people, you must expose them to different experiences (10 years of work ex-
    perience is not the same as one year, repeated 10 times). Regularly modify an employee's tasks and
 responsibilities to present new challenges. That is where experience learning happens, especially
    when these challenges allow people to play to their strengths. Regularly question each employee's
task list in your coaching conversations (e.g., do the "love and loathe" exercise) and search for op-
  portunities to refocus activities on areas that the person is naturally drawn to but that at the same
 time represent a challenge.

    Frame these development conversations by sharing your view about where the markets, the industry
and the company are heading and how your employee's plans, aspirations, and dreams fit into this
   bigger picture. Also, when designing the next learning experience for your people, explain to them
   that in today's flat organizations, development is no longer about climbing the proverbial career
    ladder. Modern careers now resemble the process of rock-climbing, where the top does not have to
 be the goal. Getting across the rock face or reaching another specific spot can be much more exciting
and rewarding.
   And above all, make your coaching situational throughout the process. Again, read Blanchard's book
 on Situational Leadership. We also recommend Beverly Kaye and Julie Winkle Giulioni's book Help
 Them Grow or Watch Them Go: Career Conversations Employees Want. It is a great resource with many
  practical tips and hands-on guidelines on how to structure your one-on-one conversations. Add Brian
 Souza's book The Weekly Coaching Conversation to help get your managers into the mindset required
   for great coaching. And last, read Chapters 5 and 6 in Marcus Buckingham and Curt Coffman's First,
 Break All the Rules: What the World's Greatest Managers Do Differently to learn more about strengths-
based management and coaching.

  "Great coaches consistently get the most out of their people, because they consistently put the most
 into their people," writes Souza. Managing people is difficult because people are complex. In today's
80

---

                                                                          The Managers (Coaches)

high-pressure environments, it is very easy to get caught up in the fight for results and to forget
  about the complex human beings who are needed to produce them. That's why it is good to remind
ourselves that in business and in life, the journey, not the destination, is the reward. Or, to quote
Souza as he beautifully describes the deeper purpose of coaching: "When all is said and done and
we've completed this journey we call life, what will matter most is not what we have achieved — but
rather who we have become."

With this in mind, we finish this chapter with a plea: People are not resources that you consume.
So rethink the name of the department that takes care of them. Call it Talent Development, Human
Relations, People Support, or Head of People Experiences — whatever term fits your culture —
choose to call this function anything but Human Resources.










81

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

 SCALING UP
STRATEGY

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

  THE STRATEGY INTRODUCTION

       KEY QUESTION: Can you state your firm's strategy simply — and is it driving sustainable growth
   in revenue and gross margins?
   Pizza delivered in 30 minutes or less, or it's free. That simply stated strategy made Tom Monaghan
 founder of Domino's Pizza, a billionaire. (He is now in the process of giving it all away.) A half-cen-
  tury later, Domino's adjusted its strategy to focus more on quality and slowed service slightly — and
growth returned, with the stock tripling in price in just 36 months since the change.
  Articulating a similarly clear and differentiated strategy, supported by a strong core culture that can
  deliver on the brand's promises, is the key for any company wanting to scale up.
          So how do you know when you have an industry-dominating, competitor-crushing strategy? Sus-
     tainable top-line revenue growth and increasing gross margin dollars (the true top line for many
 firms, as we'll discuss in "The Accounting" chapter) are the two key financial indicators. Customers
beating a path to your door, dragging along everyone they know, is another! In turn, if you don't
 have a killer strategy, your company will face continuous price pressures as the market commoditizes
 your products and services.
The other way to know if you have a strategy? Do you say "no" 20 times more than you say "yes" —
     no to the increasing number of opportunities coming your way; no to the wrong customers for your
      business model; no to nineteen of the twenty people wanting to work with you (because marketing
 is getting you a steady stream of applicants!); etc.? We recognize that in the beginning you have to
   say yes to everyone and everything. But you say yes only until you have the luxury to say no (read
    that sentence again). Those with a well-honed strategy know when to say yes and more importantly,
when to say no.
       Deep strategy work is time-consuming, as the marketplace constantly changes. To paraphrase the
     great Prussian General Carl von Clausewitz, strategy is only as good as your next encounter with
   the enemy (or decision of your competitor). Therefore, it's critical that the senior leadership team
work on it each week, free from day-to-day firefighting. The tools and routines in the "Execution"
 section will set you free to do this.
    Top strategists are often compared to grandmaster chess players. However, there is a misconception
     that these players are thinking more moves ahead of mere masters or novices. They are not. Their
    advantage is in having 10 times the NEXT moves in their repertoire, depending on the latest gambit
    of their opponent. Therefore, get help from mentors, advisors, and consultants who have developed
 strategies for hundreds of companies — they'll have more "next moves" in their bag of tricks.

   Keys to Dominating Your Market
   Verne's mentor Hermann Simon wrote the definitive book on privately held growth firms
       called Hidden Champions of the 21" Century. For an excellent summary of the seven lessons he
     discerned from studying thousands of mid-market firms that dominate their niches globally, go to

                                                                                              85

---

Scaling Up

       http://www.whiteboardmag.com/hidden-champions-1-what-german-companies-can-teach-you-about-
    innovation/ — it details a key formula for crushing your competition and is worth the 7 minutes
 to review Simon's 7 lessons.
     In addition, Salim Ismail's breakthrough book Exponential Organizations: Why new organizations
  are ten times better, faster, and cheaper than yours (and what to do about it) is a must read if you
     want to 10x your organization using the same strategies Silicon Valley's "unicorns" (startups
 that zoom to $1 billion in valuation) have used to scaleup. For a comprehensive online course
 by Ismail go to www.growthinstitute.com.

                                            Section Overview
  The first chapter, The Core, bridges the People and Strategy decisions and examines the Core of the
 organization: its Values, Purpose, and Competencies. A strong Core is the foundation for an effective
strategy. We'll share specific approaches for discovering each element, and discuss how to leverage
   this Core to drive a strong culture through the people (HR) systems — and prevent culture drift as
the organization scales. A weakened culture will torpedo any strategy.
    The second chapter, The 7 Strata of Strategy, guides you through a framework for constructing an
    industry-dominating plan. It integrates several of the best-known components of strategy — from
     Michael Porter, Jim Collins, Frances Frei, and Bob Bloom — into a single framework. The accom-
                  panige-page SataSratgy worksheet will lp you o the at hinkin or h On
      Page Strategic Plan (OPSP) and determine your company's Brand Promises, Big Hairy Audacious
Goal (BHAG®), and other components.
     The third chapter, The One-Page Strategic Plan, introduces the new SWT (strengths, weaknesses,
     and trends) tool, which augments the standard SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
    threats) analysis in preparing your strategic plan. We will guide you through the OPSP and a new
    one-page Vision Summary, which provides a more visually pleasing and simpler way to communicate
your strategic plan.
Four one-page Strategy tools will be covered in this section:
 1. 7 Strata of Strategy: a framework for integrating several important strategic components
 into one coherent plan
 2.Vision Summary: a simplified OPSP, useful for sharing your vision with employees, cus-
 tomers, shareholders, etc.
 SWT: a new strategic-planning preparation tool that augments the SWOT
 4. OPSP: a one-page worksheet for capturing the company's vision, from the Core Values to
 the Quarterly Theme, and everything else in between


86

---

Strategy: 7 Strata    Organization Name:


Words You Own (Mindshare):







Sandbox and Brand Promises:
Who/Where (Core Customers)  What (Products and Services)    BRAND PROMISES    KPIs










Brand Promise Guarantee (Catalytic Mechanism):



One-PHRASE Strategy (Key to Making Money):



Differentiating Activities (3 - 5 Hows):








X-Factor (10x - 100x Underlying Advantage)



Profit per X (Economic Engine):    BHAG* (10 - 25 Year Goal):



*BHAG is a Registered Trademark of Jim Collins and Jerry Porras

Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

Strategy: Vision Summary    Gazelles
                            GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES

CORE VALUES                 PURPOSE  BRAND PROMISES










BHAG

STRATEGIC    PRIORITIES

3-5 yr       1 yr    Qtr










Your KPls    Your Name:                                 Your Quarterly Priorities    Due
             Goal
1                          Critical #: People or B/S    1

                                                        2

2                          Between green & red
                                                        3
                           Critical #: Process or P/L
                                                        4
3
                           Between green & red          5




Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

Strategy: Strengths, Weaknesses, Trends (SWT) Worksheet  Gazelles
                                                         GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES

Trends
What are the significant changes in technology, distribution, product innovation, markets, consumer, and social trends
around the world that might impact your industry and organization?










Strengths/Core Competencies                                  Weaknesses
What are the inherent strengths of the organization that     What are the inherent weaknesses of the organization
have been the source of your success?                        that aren't likely to change?










Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

Strategy: One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP) Organization
                                                                  Name:

                                   People (Reputation Drivers)
      Employees                    Customers                                        Shareholders
1.                 1.                                                      1.
2.                 2.                                                      2.
3.                 3.                                                      3.

CORE VALUES/BELIEFS         PURPOSE                   TARGETS (35 YRS.)                 GOALS (1 YR.)
 (Should/Shouldn't)         (Why)                          (Where)                           (What)
                                                      Future Date                 Yr Ending
                                                      Revenues                     Revenues
                                                      Profit                       Profit
                                                      Mkt. Cap/Cash                 Mkt. Cap
                                                                Sandbox             Gross Margin
                                                                                    Cash
                                                                                    A/R Days
                                                                                    Inv. Days
                                                                                    Rev./Emp.
                            Actions                   Key Thrusts/Capabilities       Key Initiatives
                   To Live Values, Purposes, BHAG     3-5 Year Priorities           1 Year Priorities
                   1                                  1                             1

                   2                                  2                            2

                   3                                  3                            3

                   4                                  4                            4

                   5                                  5                            5

                   Profit per X                      Brand Promise KPIs           Critical #: People or B/S

                                                                                    Between green & red

                   BHAG®                             Brand Promises               Critical #: Process or P/L


                                                        Between green & red

Strengths/Core Competencies                             Weaknesses:
1.                                                      1,
2.                                                      2.
3.                                                      3.         BHAG is a Registered Trademark of Jim Collins and Jerry Porras.

Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

 Your Name:                                   Date:                        Gazelles
                                                                           GROwiNG LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES

                                   Process (Productivity Drivers)
               Make/Buy                         Sell                       Recordkeeping
1.                         1.                                            1.
2.                         2.                                            2.
3.                         3.                                            3.
 ACTIONS (QTR)                                 THEME                     YOUR ACCOUNTABILITY
     (How)                                  (QTR/ANNUAL)                      (Who/When)
 Qtr#                            Deadline:                                    Your KPls               Goal
 Revenues                        Measurable Target/Critical #           1
 Profit
 Mkt. Cap                                                               2
 Gross Margin
 Cash                            Theme Name
 A/R Days                                                       3
 Inv. Days
 Rev./Emp.

        Rocks                            Scoreboard Design                 Your Quarterly Priorities  Due
 Quarterly Priorities      Who   Describe and/or sketch your design     1
                                           in this space

                                                                        2
 2

 3                                                                      3

 4                                                              4

 5                                                                      5


 Critical #: People or B/S    Celebration    Critical #: People or B/S


 Between green & red    Between green & red

 Critical #: Process or P/L    Reward    Critical #: Process or P/L


 Between green & red    Between green & red

 Trends  1..
         2.             5.
         3.             6.
                          BHAG is a Registered Trademark of Jim Collins and Jerry Porras.

                        Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

    6
   THE CORE
   Values, Purpose,
   and Competencies


             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Successful athletes know the power of having a strong core, no matter what
the sport. Growth firms require a similar core to maintain a strong culture. This chapter will discuss the
  practical role of Core Values, Purpose, and Competencies when scaling up a business. It will explain how
    to articulate the Core so it's more than just a list posted on the wall. We will outline eight ways to use your
    Core to drive the people (HR) systems in the company, using the case study of Appletree Answers.


      ohn Ratliff knows the importance of articulating and communicating a company's Core: its Values,
            Purpose, and Competencies. Ratliff is the founder and former CEO of 650-employee Appletree
     Answers, an answering service and call-center provider based in Delaware. He made 24 acquisitions
    to build the company (which he sold to Stericycle Communication Solutions in June 2012), and it
    has nearly as many geographical locations. Besides managing locations thousands of miles apart,
    Ratliff's leadership team had to integrate apprehensive groups of employees into the culture after
     they suddenly found themselves under new management. Toward the end of the chapter, we'll look
     at Appletree's approach to keeping its Core and culture strong.
     Successful athletes need a strong core — or midsection — to provide overall stability, power, and
     control. The same is true for growth firms. Without a strong core, the organization risks instabil-
     ity from cultural challenges, loss of focus, disengagement, and lack of heart as it scales up. It wil
     experience the proverbial wheels fying off as the business speeds down the highway. And just as
    a strong center is based on having stronger lower-back muscles, oblique muscles, and abdominal
     muscles, there are three equivalent muscles at the center of the organization: Values, Purpose,
    and Competencies.
     This Core provides the link between People and Strategy in our 4 Decisions model. Once the
     company gets larger than 50 to 70 employees — the size at which the senior leaders no longer know
     everyone's name and start seeing "culture drift" — it is critical to codify the Core, articulate it, and
     reinforce it on an ongoing basis.
     These three foundational attributes of the company anchor the left side of the One-Page Strategic
     Plan (OPSP), fortuitously forming the letter "C" for Core (the shaded area in the diagram), and
     they represent the heart and soul of the organization.

                                                                    93

---

    Scaling Up



    Strategy: One Page Strategic Plan (OPSP)Organ ation    Your Name    Date                 Gazelles

    Employees    People (Reputation Drivers)               Shareholders
                 Customers                                              Make/Buy    Sell     Recordkeeping


CORE VALUES/BELIEFS  PURPOSE  TARGETS (3-5 YRS.)              GOALS (1 YR.)          ACTIONS (QTR)    THEME     YOUR ACCOUNTABILITY
        RS)  (W)                        (Whero)                   (What)          (4cw)            (OTR/ANNUAL)        Aho We
                              Future Date                     Yr Ending     Ou                             Deadine    Yurkits                Goa'
                              Revues                           Reverues
                              Profit                          Proft         Proft
                              Msxt. CapCash                   Mat. Cap      Mat Cap
                                         Sandbox   GrassMargin              Crass Margh
                                                              Cash          Cash                    Theme Name
                                                              CAMRr Da      AR Days
                                                              Inv. Days     Inv: Days
                                 Key Thrusts/Capabilities     Rew/Emo.      Rmp                 Scoreboard Design
    To Live Vales. Purposes. BHAG    3-5 Hear Prorbes         Key Intiatives      Rocks                         D Your Quartorty Phortes     De
                                                              Your Priontes            Ousrtordy Frorties  whe  in this space









    Profit per X    Brand Promise KPIs  Critical#: People or B/S                      Critical #: People or B/S    Celebration    Critical #: People or B/S

   :                                                                            oen groor d red
    BHAG*           Brand Promises      Critical #: Process or P/L              Critical #: Process or P/L         Reward         Critical #: Process or P/L
   a
   :                                    ayan & od
                    Weaknesses:                                                 Trends

                                                                                                                                  S s a Reghad Tad of An Cois and ky Po
    Cooyignt 2015 Guakes. irc    odmo cap and t ohmemetn t too phao to w gunac  Cygr 215 Gasndles re



    Let's take a look at each component of the Core, how it's determined, and practical tips for using
    each to anchor the focus and culture of the business.



                                                 The Core Values

         Hatim Tyabji built VeriFone from $31 million to $600 million in 11 years, dominating the global
    market in clearing credit card transactions. His key leadership tool, he says, was a small nine-page
        "blue book," translated into eight languages, which outlined the values at the heart of VeriFone's
         culture. When Tyabji took over as CEO, he discerned the rules that had made VeriFone successful
     up to that point, created the book, and then "essentially spent the next 11 years repeating myself," he
         notes. He is now leading a turnaround of Best Buy as chairman and in 2013 welcomed back founder
       Richard Schulze as chairman emeritus, clearly a nod to keeping the company rooted in its beginnings
    and its four Core Values.

         Core Values are the rules and boundaries that define the company's culture and personality, and
    provide a final "Should/Shouldn't" test for all the behaviors and decisions by everyone in the firm. It's
    especially important that top managers lead by example, making sure their behaviors and decisions
    align with the Values.

    When Values fully permeate the company, the leadership team can avoid being sucked into many of
    the day-to-day operational issues. The rule becomes, "If you think you need to ask me permission

    94

---

                                                                            The Core

for something, just consult the Core Values!" This gives management the confidence to delegate
important tasks. They can trust that employees will know the right things to do when faced with a
decision or an ethical dilemma.
Similar values and boundaries play a parallel role in parenting. The key is having a handful of rules,
repeating yourself a lot, and hoping that your family's values sink in by the time your children strike
out on their own.

The Organization's Personality
What are your Core Values? As we discussed in "The Leaders" chapter, your company is a living,
breathing organism with a distinct personality. It expresses that personality through its Values.
Think of your company as a child. If it is less than 5 years old, its Values are still being formed.
The Values you listed when you started it may take a few years to take shape fully. Years later, these
will be baked in, just as someone's personality at age 50 is a more hardened version of who he or
she was at age 5. Our behaviors, aspirations, knowledge, vocations, and interests may change, but
not our foundational personality.
To try to change a firm's Core Values will send the organization into endless therapy, the same way a
parent's efforts to force a child into a mold will. (Why do you think change management gurus make
the big bucks but almost always fail?) J. Stuart Moore, co-founder of Boston-based global services
company Sapient, shares that his biggest mistake was modifying the company's five Core Values to
       accommodate a major acquisition. He blames that change for the subsequent challenges Sapient
faced. He resolved them only when the company went back to its initial list.
This speaks to why the term "merger" should be eliminated from the business vocabulary. There is no
such thing. There are only acquisitions. The rare few companies that succeed in scaling up by making
them, as Ratliff did at Appletree, have a process for quickly inculcating the acquired employees into
the acquirer's existing culture (more on this later).
Creating such a process requires a company to accurately discover and define its own Core, starting
with its Values.

Discovering the Right Words
Companies can spend tens of thousands of dollars and many months laboring through employee
surveys and management meetings to figure out their Values, only to end up with a generic list of
platitudes — like "honesty, integrity, teamwork, and customer service" — that misses the uniqueness
and power of the existing culture.
Discerning the Core Values is a DISCOVERY process, not the creation of a wish list of nice-to-haves.
Using an approach similar to that of archaeologists examining the artifacts of an ancient culture
                                                                                                 95

---

Scaling Up

 our coaching partners help firms identify similar artifacts    "Discerning the Core Values
  within their own company cultures and establish a starting    is a discovery process."
set of Values.
 WARNING: Once you have this starting list, do not carve it in stone, as one of our early clients did.
  (That client's CEO literally had small engraved stones sitting on everyone's desks a week after the
   exercise.) Let the Values bake for a year, testing their validity at the next several quarterly planning
    sessions. Ask the leadership team, "Are there plenty of examples where we lived these Values?" If there
 are, you likely are talking about a Core Value. If there are not, then it might have been a wish-list item
 or a Core Value that has weakened significantly. When Verne's team did something similar for Gazelles,
          we discovered one Value that wasn't core, found we had missed one (we had lots of stories, but no
       Value representing them), and reworded a few to match the actual language we used as we told stories
 supporting that Value.
 To give you the flavor of the Core Values of a growth company, here are Gazelles':
 Practice what we preach
 Nothing less than ecstatic customers
 First class for less
 Honor intellectual capitalists
 Everyone an entrepreneur
 Never, ever, ever give up
For additional examples, read the Harvard Business Review article titled "Building Your Compa-
 ny's Vision," by James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras. You'll notice that all the Values listed are
           phrases, not single words. And they are not all feel-good Values. One of Disney's Core Values is
            "Preservation and control of the Disney magic," which accurately describes one of the most con-
          trolling cultures you'll ever experience. Values are neither good nor bad. They just are! The key
 is to articulate them accurately
           To communicate these Values throughout the organization, take a page from Tyabji's blue book. It
   describes each Core Value with a phrase, defined in a sentence or two, and then anchored with an
          actual story (or legend) detailing how an employee or a team lived that Value. And since VeriFone
 operates globally, Tyabji had each one-page description of a Value translated into eight languages.
    Ezypay, Australia's largest direct-debit service provider, has taken this a step further and created an
           avatar and a supporting video for each Core Value. The avatars show up everywhere - in Quarterly
        Themes, on the walls of the company's situation room, in documents, etc. Go to ezypay.com/about-us/
 our-values/ to view the avatars.
          Let us know if we can help you properly discover the right Core Values. Discerning the wrong list
 will only confuse the organization and relegate it to endless therapy!


96

---

                                                                               The Core

                      The Core Purpose

    If the Core Values are the soul of the organization, the core Purpose (some call it "mission") gives
         it heart. The Purpose answers the ageless question "Why?" Why does what we do matter, and
       what difference are we making in the world? Why would our customers or the world miss us if we
weren't around?

Without a Purpose more heartfelt than that of making           "A powerful Purpose tends
money (there are plenty of other places on the OPSP to
represent this goal), employees will pour their enthusiasm     to revolve around a single
and energy into something else. Research finds that if you     word or idea."
 ignite and capture their hearts, not just their heads, they
will give you 40% more discretionary effort.

 We find that a powerful Purpose tends to revolve around a single word or idea:
  3M: Innovation
  Disney: Happiness
  Wal-Mart: Robin Hood

 Even Starbucks' heritage was built on the idea of being an escape — a third place — between work
and home.
     When the international school that Verne's children attend wrestled with the question of Purpose,
    rather than settle for a rather lengthy and boring statement that sounded like every other school's
     it grabbed hold of the idea of engagement: to create an environment where students, teachers, par-
      ents, and the community are so engaged (something you can feel and see) that learning becomes a
  lifelong pursuit. What it takes to create this kind of passion then drove the rest of the strategic plan
for the school.

     This central word or idea is then expanded into a phrase or two, but is most easily remembered and
    acted upon when it has a single word or idea at its core. To discern this Purpose, gather a team to-
     gether and start with the question, "What do we do?" (You might answer: "We're a school." "We sell
       overpriced coffee." "We host a CRM system.") Then ask "Why?" several times (a technique known
     as the five whys). Why does this matter, or what difference can we make? Keep asking until you get
to your version of "Save the world," and then back up one step.
       At Gazelles, we are an executive education and coaching company. Why does this matter? In the
   end, it's all about freedom. It's freeing leadership teams from the day-to-day so they can get out and
     grow the firm. It's about helping entrepreneurs, who launched a business for the freedom and inde-
    pendence it promised, to deal with the new constraints of their own creation. And ultimately, we see
   ourselves as freedom fighters. "A country with gazelles excels" is our motto. There cannot be a truly
      free society without growth firms underpinning a healthy economy and generating jobs. You don't
have to buy into this, but this is why we wake up and keep plugging away.

                                                                                         97

---

    Scaling Up

    "Building Your Company's Vision," the HBR article referenced above, also lists several Purposes
    for well-known companies. Also check out Peter Diamandis' "Massively Transformative Purpose.
      WARNING: Most teams, when asked to determine a Purpose, often describe Brand Promises instead.
      (The Brand Promise concept is covered in the next chapter.) When asking the five whys, a staffing
      company might conclude, "We help our clients hire the best talent and save them valuable time in the
      process." These might be two accurate Brand Promises — Best Talent and Save Time — but the Pur-
      pose goes deeper than just describing the attributes of your product or service. For Michigan-based
      staffing firm EmploymentGroup, for example, the deeper Purpose is "Helping people succeed."
    Out of this single idea should emerge a "stump speech" that the CEO shares repeatedly, reminding
    everyone of the big picture and "why we do what we do." When CEO Howard Schultz famously
    shut down Starbucks for a global day of training, it wasn't as much about how to make a better latte
    as about recentering and reminding everyone of the real Purpose of the company: to be a third place
    for people to stop in and purchase an affordable luxury after a stressful day. Offering a place to relax
    in a comfortable setting, Starbucks plays a role similar to what the local pub once did.

     Mission, Vision, Values
     "Mission, vision, values" likely became a popular moniker of strategic planning because it has
     a nice ring to it. Our use of related terminology and definitions differs. To clarify:
       Mission: We prefer the term "Purpose," which is more heartfelt. "Mission" is more of a
       military term and usually connotes something shorter in duration (e.g., the kind of short-
       term assignments found in the popular Mission: Impossible television and movie series).
      Vision: This is what we cover in the OPSP, from Core Values to the Quarterly Theme
       and everything in between. If you feel compelled to create a vision statement, you can
       extract pieces from the OPSP — Values, Purpose, the Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG),
      Brand Promises, etc. — and craft them into a soon-to-be forgotten paragraph. (Sorry for
      the sarcasm, but we're not big fans of vision statements.) It's better to keep these elements
      of your vision separate in people's minds, so they can remember them more easily. The
      Vision Summary tool, described in "The One-Page Strategic Plan" chapter, will provide
      your team with an easy-to-remember summary of your vision.
      Values: On this term, we have consensus.
    Pick whatever language you prefer — Mission vs. Purpose, for instance — and use the terms
    consistently.


                                     The Core Competencies
Understanding a company's inherent strengths is essential. Gary Hamel and the late C.K. Prahalad
labeled them Core Competencies in their groundbreaking May 1990 Harvard Business Review article
 titled "The Core Competence of the Corporation." Purchase a copy online and have the strategic
    98

---

                                                                              The Core

    thinking team read it; then discuss and determine your company's Core Competencies. (See "The
    7 Strata of Strategy" chapter for more on this important meeting rhythm.)
    A Core Competency has three attributes, according to Prahalad and Hamel:
     1. It is not easy for competitors to imitate.
     2. It can be reused widely for many products and markets.
     3. It must contribute to the benefits the end customer experiences       "Don't define
     and the value of the product or service to customers.                    Core Competencies
   Don't define Core Competencies too narrowly. Take BIC, the Paris-based     too narrowly."
   company founded in 1945. It is known for the disposable BIC pen. Had
 BIC seen its Core Competency as simply making cheap pens, it wouldn't be the $2 billion firm it is
   today. BIC more accurately describes its strength as "making disposable plastic anything," which led
  it into lighters, razors, and other stationery products.
      It's equally important for a company to understand what it is inherently incapable of doing, or its core
         weaknesses. 3M has never been effective at selling direct to consumers, so it has developed a core
       strength of working effectively with distribution partners. In turn, it has divested itself of certain
  product lines that the market has forced into direct channels.
       As we'll discuss later in the "Strategy" section, your organization's Core Competencies provide bound-
 aries for determining what product and service offerings you should pursue. They are also foundational
         in helping you determine how to differentiate the company in the marketplace. Once you articulate
         your Values, Purpose, and Competencies, put them to work in creating an engaged and focused team.

                        Bringing Your Core Alive
         It was during an off-site meeting to prepare for the fourth quarter of 2008 that Appletree Answers
          decided to tackle turnover among frontline employees at its call centers. While churn among non-
           exempt employees was only 3%, turnover was 110% for the employees who answered the phones for
         clients, matching the industry average. "Clearly, we were doing something right for one group but
 not the other," says Ratliff, the founder.
     Ratliff was well-aware that the company's 13 acquisitions to date made it difficult to achieve a cohesive
        culture. He knew that this lack of cohesion was contributing to the turnover. But he didn't realize
that because he and his leadership team were painfully out of touch with the frontline employees'
concerns, they were adding to the problem.

 The Dream On Initiative
          Just how little he knew about the lives of the frontline employees became very clear after Lisa
           Phillips, the company's director of operations, asked how the company could become more like a
                                                                                            99

---

 Scaling Up

Make-A-Wish Foundation for employees. Her question was in line with Appletree's Core Value
 Take care of each other."

       After having a small group of employees flesh out the idea, the company launched the Dream On
   initiative, which it advertised on its intranet and on posters. It asked employees to submit a request
tied to one thing they would like to happen in their personal lives. There were no restrictions placed.
 A secret committee would review the requests.

 As the responses trickled in, Ratliff got a crash course in the daily realities that his frontline employ-
   ees faced. "It was nothing short of shocking," he says. "We started to really get an insight into the
 challenges of our employees and the situations they had inherited."

       Many team members were grappling with health problems or coping with the challenges of caring
  for elderly parents — factors that affected their ability to juggle their jobs with their lives outside
       of work. Others were suffering financial problems, having had a period of unemployment before
      joining Appletree, and they needed a few thousand dollars to get caught up. Seventeen employees
simply wished they could own a car to make it easier to get to work.

       "I was surprised by the car situation — how a change in a bus route can force our employees to
        change jobs, or how a previous employer may have changed job hours, which no longer matched
 public transportation schedules," Ratliff says.

         Some of the stories were heart-wrenching. To help employees turn them around, the company
      decided to provide grants and other resources through the program. One employee was living in
     the family car with her husband and child, after her mate had lost his job. The company helped the
    family secure a lease and put up deposit money, also providing furniture and gift cards to help them
 get set up in their new home.

  "We meant to do this privately, but the employee let a lot of people know, and soon it was on our
 intranet," says Ratliff. "That dramatically increased submissions.'

       Over time, Appletree Answers used American Express points to send a couple on their honeymoon;
    flew a mother to see her daughter in the Navy over Christmas; and fulfilled the dream of an employee
 to take a first family vacation with her disabled daughter.

    "What CEOs don't realize is the access you have that other people don't, and how you can create
opportunities for people you never would have thought of," says Ratliff

   The program had a profound effect on turnover, given that call centers are usually run like the sweat-
    shops of the Information Age. Not long after Ratliff and his team launched the Dream On initiative,
     turnover dropped to 20%. While the initiative cost money, it paid a 20 times return on investment
 in terms of reduced turnover costs in less than a year.

 "The overall sense of belonging, of being part of something bigger than themselves or their indi-
 vidual sites, and part of a community, has been one of the biggest changes I've seen in employees,

100

---

                                                                                   The Core

says Ratliff. "I felt more connected to our entire group, and the company became much more human
to people."
As Ratliff grew the business, ultimately acquiring 24 companies in less than nine years, his leadership
team determined a distinct set of seven Core Values:
  Integrity matters
  Think like a customer
  Spirited fun
  Be quick, but don't hurry (borrowed from legendary basketball coach John Wooden)
  Employees are critical
  Small details are huge
  Take care of each othe
They also articulated a Purpose: "Enhancing the lives of customers and employees, one interaction at
   a time." The key word was "interaction." Appletree handled 25 million inbound calls a year, generating
     millions of interactions between customers, employees, and supervisors. Ratliff wanted the team to
    realize they had a conscious choice to enhance or diminish those interactions for everyone involved.
"The Purpose really created a common language," Ratliff says. "Growth companies are good at getting
     a lot of things done. The worst thing you can do is get a massive amount of the wrong things done.
    If you have clearly articulated Core Values and a Purpose that are part of your everyday experience,
it helps direct that massive action around the right activities."

    Appletree had a well-honed process for instilling these Values and Purpose in the employees of each
     acquired company from the very first day. The idea was to give new and existing employees a refer-
     ence point to help them make decisions, even when their manager was not available to advise them.

      "Appletree's strategy for getting a brand-new group of employees rapidly engaged into our culture
  was one of our main Core Competencies," said Ratliff. "We actually tracked site-level profitability. By
     immediately improving the engagement levels of these new employees, we were able to see a 10-point
          increase in EBITDA." This engagement took place because employees experienced a company where
everyone, especially the leadership team, was living the stated Values and Purpose.

 Dell's Shock Absorber
          When his company reached 50 employees, Michael Dell recognized the need to hire someone
 to manage the People side of his growing business and serve as a shock absorber between him
       and the rest of the organization. He recruited Barbara Kreisman from Motorola University. She
       helped him scale the company to 40,000 people before leaving Dell. (She is currently associate
dean of the Daniels College of Business at the University of Denver.)
         The HR department is normally one of the last functions to develop fully in a growing com-
     pany. It normally begins as a part-time responsibility of the founder's assistant, who is told to

                                                                                   101

---

 Scaling Up

   "keep the employees happy" so the CEO can stay focused on the customers and the market in the
   early days of the business! As the function matures, random lists creep into the organization — a
   criteria list for hiring, a list of rewards to hand out, and a list of topics for the handbook. Some-
   one typically downloads generic forms from the Web and executes global search-and-replaces
  to insert the company's name. It's this growing hodgepodge of HR activities that need to be
   brought back into alignment.

A leader must go beyond merely posting a company's Values and Purpose on the wall and handing out
plastic laminated cards. The key is for you to align ALL of your HR (People) systems and processes
 around one list of your Values and Purpose.
 Here are eight ways to use this list to reinforce your culture on a regular basis.

  Storytelling
Everybody enjoys a good story, and most great leaders have taught through parable or storytelling
 Stories provide the explanation for Core Values that might seem unusual or cryptic on their own.
 Identify some "legends" and current stories that represent each Value.
 To collect great stories about Appletree's Core Values, Ratliff and his team initiated a Core Values
 Hall of Fame event, held every quarter. Employees were encouraged to look for colleagues whose
 actions embodied a Core Value and to submit a written story about this. "It was more rewarding for
 the person who wrote the story than for the person who was recognized when we told the story,"
 Ratliff says.
  Some of the stories were dramatic, conveying the meaning of the Core Values better than a corpo-
 rate HR department ever could. One particular story vividly illustrates the Value "Take care of each
 other." An employee got a call at 3 a.m. from a woman living upstairs from her parents, who ran a
  disaster restoration company that Appletree Answers served.
  "I'm upstairs. Can you get my dad? It's really important," the caller said, and then the line went dead.
 The employee could easily have treated this as a prank but instead tracked down the caller's father.
  Her father went upstairs and found out she was having a heart attack. (She is fine now.)
  That story was one of the winners in Appletree's quarterly contest, showing how the value of taking
  care of each other could go beyond the walls of the company.
  Under Ratliff's leadership, Appletree gradually built a rich collection of employee-created con-
  tent by hiring a documentary videographer. The videographer helped teams of employees create
 a 90-second video around each of the Core Values. "It wasn't the corporate marketing crap you
  always get," says Ratliff.

  102

---

                                                                                     The Core

 The videographer also created humorous videos around the company's Quarterly Themes (more on
 this in "The Priority" chapter), which helped transmit the company's Values in a different way. (No
 one says your discussions of Core Values need to be boring!) In one wacky 2010 series, employees
 from various offices put together talent shows around the theme of "The Summer of Love" and posted
 them on YouTube. The idea was to encourage employees to relax after a tough quarter.

 Recruitment and Selection

 Design your interview questions and assessments to test how candidates align with your Core Values
 (more on this in "The Team" chapter). Then rate candidates in terms of their perceived alignment
 with each Core Value. Your goal, after all, is to hire for culture fit. This also applies when you are
 making acquisitions and deciding which employees to keep on board.
 Shape your hiring processes around your Core Values. At Appletree, the online application form
 asked would-be hires to elaborate on a Core Value. Later, those who made it to the interview stage
 were asked to talk more about why a Value resonated with them. Interviewers looked for people who
 genuinely lit up when they talked about a Core Value and weren't just spouting
 a canned answer. "If we saw feigned interest or an indifferent attitude, we   "Hire for
 knew it was not going to be a strong culture fit," says Ratliff               culture fit."

 Hiring this way helps reduce turnover. "It's amazing how much more effective
 you can be at hiring when you select people who are excited about your culture before they come to
 work for you," Ratliff says.

 Onboarding Process
 Many growth firms lack proper onboarding for new employees. Everyone seems too busy to organize
    it, and there's a mentality that new recruits are needed on the job from day one. However, a proper
       onboarding process makes new hires feel welcome and integrates them more quickly into the cul-
     ture. The key is designing the process around the teaching of your Values and Purpose. (We prefer
     the term "onboarding" vs. "orientation." It's more than just showing people where the printers and
bathrooms are.)
    This is what Appletree did whenever it made an acquisition. On the very first day that employees in
a newly acquired branch switched over to Appletree's payroll, employees from other locations would
   arrive to welcome their fellow associates. Appletree's team would share stories and videos created by
employees to introduce the company's Values and Purpose
 "We basically said, 'You don't have to live these in your personal life, but if you want to be part of the
   family we've created at work, these are the Values we've all agreed to work under. This is our shared
language and commitment to each other,' " says Ratliff


103

---

  Scaling Up

   It is worth noting that Appletree renamed its HR Department the Employee Experience Depart-
   ment. "The #1 goal of HR was to create better employee experiences, and we wanted them to focus
 on that," says Ratliff.

   See "The Managers" chapter for more onboarding ideas.

   Performance Appraisals and Handbooks

  Core Values should provide the framework on which you hang your performance appraisal system.
   With a little creativity, any performance measure can be
  made to link with a Core Value. In addition, organize your      "Organize your employee
 employee handbook into sections around each Core Value.          handbook into sections

   Ratliff and his leadership team at Appletree made it clear     around each Core Value."
 that learning the Core Values wasn't just a feel-good exer-
   cise. Employees' performance was scored on how well they
 acted on the Core Values. For instance, employees would be graded on how well they thought like
  a customer.

   "Anytime you have a discussion with an employee about performance, it's much easier if you have a
  Core Value you can tie it back to," Ratliff says.

  Removing gray areas helped to make performance evaluations more productive, preventing rhet-
  orical debate between managers and employees about what aspects of performance were important,
he adds.
 "When you both have agreed in advance to the rules of the game," says Ratliff, "it gives you a lot of
 leverage in your discussion with employees around performance.'

 It also made it easier for managers to give constructive feedback. "No one could say, 'I made mistakes
because I was up against a deadline,' " says Ratliff. "We'd ask, 'How does that marry with, Be quick,
 but don't hurry?"

  Recognition andRewards

 Organize your recognition and reward categories around your Core Values. You will gain a new source
  of corporate stories and legends each time a reward or recognition is given to highlight a Value.

In conducting its quarterly Core Values Hall of Fame, Appletree selected a winner for each of its
 seven Values, based on the stories employees submitted about them. Each winner received a T-shirt
 imprinted with the corresponding Core Value.


104

---

                                                                           The Core

 Newsletters

 Why struggle to come up with a catchy title for a newsletter when some word or phrase from your
 Core Values will do beautifully? Highlight one Core Value in each issue, incorporating stories (yes,
 more stories) about people putting these Core Values to work for the betterment of the company.
 Add a list of birthdays and anniversaries, and you have a useful newsletter.

 If your company doesn't have a newsletter, get creative. Appletree spread the best stories employees
 submitted about co-workers living the Core Values by publishing them to a portal on the company's
 website. Appletree also sent every office a plaque printed with each of the inaugural seven stories to
 hang on the wall. As employees came up with new stories that better embodied the company's Core
 Values, the company updated the website and the plaques.

 Themes

 Use your Core Values to bring attention to your corporate improvement efforts. Milliken, the textile
 manufacturer, takes one of its six Core Values and makes it the theme for the quarter, asking all
 employees to focus on ways to improve the company around the theme. The worldwide Ritz-Carlton
 chain goes to the other extreme and highlights one "rule" every day. In either case, establish a rhythm
 that keeps the Core Values top-of-mind by repeating them.

 Everyday Reinforcement (The Most Important Step)

 Having managers who are engaged, every day, in reinforcing the company's Values and Purpose
 through their decision-making is the most important routine of the eight.

 Ratliff made sure that frontline employees saw that they weren't the only ones who were expected to
 act on the company's Core Values. The leadership team very openly used its Values to make decisions
 about taking on new business and continuing to work with existing clients.

 "One of our Core Values is 'Employees are critical,'" Ratliff notes. "If we had a customer who was
 abusive to employees, we'd have a conversation with them. If the customer would continue to be
 abusive, we would fire the customer."

The company's Core Value of "Integrity matters" also played a role in vetting new customers. "We
 often turned down companies that were on the fringe of integrity," says Ratliff. "A lot of companies
 would want to use us to shield them from angry customers they treated poorly. Some got into trouble
and had a PR nightmare and wanted to come to us, so we would take all the angry customer calls.
We wouldn't do that if we thought the reason the customers were mad was the company didn't act
with integrity on the issue."

Your Core Values shouldn't be a marketing initiative, says Ratliff. At Appletree, he says: "We would
talk about the Core Values all day, every day. They were part of our DNA."

                                                                             105

---

Scaling Up

Your Core Values will probably be different than Appletree's, but they should be just as much a part
of daily life at your company.

  Carrots and Sticks - Tie to Values and Purpose
  Managers basically have two tools — carrots and sticks — and hopefully, they use more carrots
  than sticks or they are badly in need of a course subtitled "Anger Management"!
 Every time you praise or reprimand someone, tie it         "Every time you praise or
 back to a Core Value or Purpose. "The reason I'm
 excited about this new chat window on the website is       reprimand someone, tie it back
  it's exactly what will help us create 'ecstatic custom-   to a Core Value or Purpose."
 ers.'" Or "The reason I'm blowing a gasket is this is
  the opposite of what we mean by first class for less.'"
  We've found that managers and CEOs can repeat Core Values endlessly without it seeming
  ridiculous, as long as the Core Values they're using are relevant and meaningful to their em-
  ployees and they make connections to real situations. When you make a decision, relate it to
 a Value. When a customer issue arises, compare the situation to the ideal represented by the
  Value. Small as these actions may sound, they probably do more than any of the aforementioned
 strategies to bring Core Values alive in your organization.


Results?

In the end, does all this "soft" stuff matter or is it just a bunch of feel good consulting tricks to keep
everyone distracted? As mentioned earlier, at Appletree Answers, Ratliff and his team were able to
drive employee turnover down from an industry annual average of 200% to below 20%. In turn, they
were able to drive profit up from an industry average 4% to 21%. And when it came time to sell
the firm commanded a 14 times multiple sales price vs. the industry's typical three times multiple.
So, yes, getting the Core right and using it to drive the business makes great business sense besides
creating a great place to work.
The Core also serves as a foundational piece to setting strategy, as we'll discuss in the next
two chapters.










106

---

THE 7 STRATA OF STRATEGY
The Framework for Dominating
Your Industry


  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Without a powerful, industry-dominating strategy, you'll spend the next sever-
  a years generating very ltetraction in themarketplace.Toaddress this hallenge,we'veintegrate sevel
 the best-known strategic concepts into one comprehensive framework — called The 7 Strata of Strategy — for
 lngu ouss.TheStateines the cple n—n then verthi alig withthin
 provides an agenda for the strategicthinking team to create and maintain a competition-crushing, diferentiated
 apc tpeark.Theeeur bols u te'destandin
 stratum. It's hard work, which is why we suggest you assign this effort to a handful of leaders


  Canada-based BuildDirect.com, which sells building materials through its website, has doubled
 sales each year since Jeff Booth and Rob Banks founded it in 2003. Its 2014 run rate is $200 million
 and it's quickly heading toward a billion. Why? Strategy!

 When you nail your strategy, top-line revenue growth and fat    "More companies die from
 margins come almost effortlessly. For those experiencing this   indigestion than starvation."
 kind of rapid and sustainable growth, skip this chapter. (We're
 serious!) Don't risk messing up your winning strategy. Your only
  challenge, like that of BuildDirect.com, will be to heed the warning made famous by HP's Dave Packard,
  who was once advised that "more companies die from indigestion than starvation.'
 For leaders of companies that are not buried by too much business, read on. Without an effective
 strategy, you're going to spend the next several years executing a plan that is less than optimal and
 leaving a pile of money on the table. Worse, you'll keep the doors open for savvier competitors to
  swoop in and take over your industry.
  Using BuildDirect.com as a case study (along with ample other examples), we'll walk you through the
  one-page 7 Strata of Strategy tool it used to dominate its industry. The 7 Strata is a comprehensive
 framework for creating a robust strategy that differentiates your company from the competition and
  helps you establish the kind of roadblocks that allow you to dominate your niche in the marketplace.
  For those familiar with the One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP), think about the 7 Strata framework as
  the "page behind the page" — a worksheet drilling down into the details of your Sandbox (WHAT
                                                                                         107

---

   Scaling Up

   you sell to WHOM and WHERE), Brand Promises, and the Profit per X and Big Hairy Audacious
   Goal (BHAG®), which are highlighted in columns 2 and 3 of the OPSP.
   The idea is to use the 7 Strata worksheet to answer a series of strategic questions and plug some of
     the answers into the appropriate spaces on the OPSP. The questions will help you make key strategic
     decisions. Why aren't there spaces for all the 7 Strata answers on the OPSP? Because some should be
     kept confidential, and others cover details behind a few specific decisions summarized on the OPSP.
      With each of the 7 Strata (levels) of decision-making, we'll share a KEY RESOURCE to help you dig
   deeper into that particular aspect of your strategy. In most cases, entire books have been written about
     the Strata, and where an appropriate one exists, we refer to it. We strongly suggest dividing up the
       workload and having each executive team member read one of the recommended books or articles and
   then brief the rest of the executives. Strategy is what a senior team should be spending the bulk of its
     time on, anyway — not fighting fires on a day-to-day basis, which is best left to the middle managers.
                             NOTE: Ihis work were asy, eey cpany would have a kill sratyThe proess cn e vey
       uncomfortable for CEOs, who might feel they should already have all the answers. After all, it's the
   CEO's primary job to set and drive the strategy of the business. At the same time, it's a very messy and
     creative process requiring lots of learning and talk time with a myriad number of customers, advisors,
    and team members. This can be particularly difficult for engineering types who want to follow a sequen-
   tial process to finding the right answers. It just doesn't happen that way.
     Of all the methods we teach, this is the one where you must truly "trust the process." Persevere, keep
      searching (it took Wayne Huizenga, a very savvy serial entrepreneur, several years to find the key to
  making AutoNation's strategy work), and the magic will occur.

  Strategic Thinking Team — The Council
    As mentioned in "The Overview," it's helpful to think about strategic planning in terms of two separate
     and distinct activities (and teams): strategic thinking and execution planning. The 7 Strata framework
           is one of the key tools guiding the strategic thinking agenda of the company. The 4Ps of market-
           ing (Product, Place, Price, and Promotion) is the other guiding framework. From our perspective,
        marketing strategy = strategy. For an update to the 4Ps, search the Internet for ad agency Ogilvy &
 Mather's 4Es of marketing (Experience, Everyplace, Exchange, and Evangelism), and add these to
 your marketing meeting and strategic thinking agendas.
    The first step in completing the 7 Strata and working through
   the 4Ps or 4Es of marketing is designating a strategic thinking  "It's not sufficient to schedule
    team. Select no more than three to five people to meet for an  thinking time just once every
     hour or so each week to discuss each of the Strata and other  quarter or year."
   issues of strategic importance. It's not sufficient to schedule
     strategic thinking time once every quarter or year. It's all
about iterations: making a few decisions, testing them, and coming back to the table the following
week for discussion. It's these ongoing weekly meetings that will keep your strategy relevant and fresh.
108

---

                                                                            The 7 Strata of Strategy

         Jim Collins refers to this team as "the council." Grab a copy of Collins' Good to Great: Why Some
         Companies Make the Leap.. And Others Don't and read the three most important pages ever written in
         business — Pages 114 to 116 — where he describes the 11 guidelines for structuring such a council.
           Included are recommendations on who should be on this council. Besides a few key members from
          the senior team, you might include someone with specific industry or domain knowledge underpin-
    ning your strategy.
The council doesn't accomplish its work in isolation. The council members are expected to spend time
          each week talking with customers and employees and checking out competitors, extracting insights
     and ideas to fuel their strategic thinking. People get the sense that geniuses like Steve Jobs sat around
       humming in a lotus position, hoping divine intervention would strike. To the contrary, Jobs spent most
         afternoons engaged directly with customers, much to the chagrin of his team. And, underscoring the
         link between strategy and marketing, he chaired only one function — marketing — via a three-hour,
    Wednesday-afternoon meeting.
         Jim Collins emphasizes that holding the council isn't a consensus-building exercise. The team mem-
          bers are there to give advice to the CEO. And they are there to help the company illuminate the
          winding road ahead, which is why strategist Gary Hamel calls these groups "headlight teams." The
         key is to help the CEO see beyond the speed at which the company is growing so he or she can keep
    the company from careening off the side of the road.
        In the end, strategic decisions need to be made, and it's the job of the CEO to make them. Yet it's
         advisable to recruit several pairs of eyes (and to have frequent contact with the market) to help
    you navigate.

     Lords of Strategy
     The creation of the 7 Strata of Strategy framework was inspired by a book written by Walter Kiech-
        el III, a former Fortune editor and Harvard Business Publishing editorial director. Titled Lords of
      Strategy: The Secret Intellectual History of the New Corporate World, it chronicles the relatively short
        50-year history of corporate strategy and the four men who were the pioneers in the field. For lead-
       ers interested in the topic of strategy, it's an invaluable resource documenting, in one easy-to-read
            package, the frameworks used by Boston Consulting Group, Bain & Co., McKinsey & Co., Porter
     Consulting, and many others.
          What struck us, as we read the book, is how overly complex many of the models are. They were de-
        signed for large global conglomerates. At the same time, stating a simple definition of one's market
     (or Sandbox) and a few Brand Promises, as required on the OPSP, was too simplistic.
      There needed to be something in the middle — for middle-market firms — that integrated several
         important aspects of strategy, and thus was born the 7 Strata of Strategy framework. We tested it
        with several firms for three years and found that it drove the exact kinds of strategies that helped
            companies like BuildDirect.com dominate their industries. We knew then that we had something
     powerful, yet simple enough to help gazelles scale.
                                                                                        109

---

 Scaling Up

     Again, for those interested in the relationship between the 7 Strata and the OPSP, think of the 7
    Strata as the pure "strategic thinking" piece of the strategic planning that the OPSP guides. As we
       take you through each of the 7 Strata, we suggest that you download the one-page worksheet at
 scalingup.com and follow along. Here are the 7 Strata:
  Words You Own (Mindshare)
  2Sandbox and Brand Promises
  3Brand Promise Guarantee (Catalytic Mechanism)
  4.One-PHRASE Strategy (Key to Making Money)
  5.Differentiating Activities (3 to 5 Hows)
  6.X-Factor (10x - 100x Underlying Advantage)
  7.Profit per X (Economic Engine) and BHAG® (10- to 25-year goal)
   NOTE: Most strategy frameworks include some kind of competitive analysis.As you work thro
   the 7 Strata, it's illuminating for the team to discuss how the competition might fill in each level — and
    to do the same for firms you highly respect outside your industry. This will give you additional insight
    into the market, the competition, and ways to differentiate your strategy

           Words You Own (Mindshare)
    KEY RESOURCE: Search Engine (Google, Bing) tools                         Strategy: Srva
 No one can own the word "automobile" in the minds of the marketplace,
 but Volvo owns "safety." Meanwhile, BMW has molded every decision
 about the design and marketing of its cars around two words: "driving
 experience." Though BMW is also considered a luxury and performance
 vehicle, the company's obsession with the driving experience is what
 continues to differentiate the car from other mass luxury vehicles.
 If you're lucky, the name of your company becomes the word you own,
 like Facebook. Or your company name can clearly describe what you do
 and represent the words you want to own in the minds of your market,
 like "trench safety." If you're entrepreneurial, you can name a new niche
 and then own it by default. J. Darius Bikoff did this in the bottled water industry in 1996. No one
 could own "bottled water," but he added some vitamins and minerals and created the first new bev-
erage category in 25 years, called "enhanced waters." Though consumers were unaware of this term,
Bikoff's Glacéau brands captured the attention of the big players in the industry. Coke snatched up
 the company for $4.1 billion just over a decade later.
The developers of Snapchat combined these ideas, creating a new category of chat and cleverly naming
the venture after the two words the application now owns in the minds of the market. Launched in
September 2011, the company now has a multibillion-dollar valuation.
110

---

                                                              The 7 Strata of Strategy

    It's a fun and useful exercise to think of well-known brands (and your competition) and discern the
wor they own. In the end, that's what branding is al abou: ownig a small pieceof the mindspace
      within a company's targeted market, whether that's in a local neighborhood, an industry segment,
     or the world. If you want to hurt a competitor, steal its word, as Google did with Yahoo, becoming
the "search" engine of choice.
Since 87% of ALL customers (business, consumer, and gov-
ernment) search the Internet to find options for purchasing   "The key is owning words
products and services, you need to dominate these search en-  that matter."
gines. The key is owning words that matter — the ones people
think about and use to search for your products and services.
    These search engines are useful tools for discerning your company's or competitors' success at own-
     ing a certain set of words. Take a moment to search the words or phrases you think you should own
        in the minds of your customers, and see how high your company ranks — or whether your lesser
       competitors are outranking you. Then go to the Google AdWords Keyword Planner to see how many
     times someone has searched for your target word or phrase. More important, this tool will show you
     what related words are searched and with what frequency, both locally and globally. This will help
you refine the words you choose to dominate.
    The tool will tell you how many advertisers are bidding for a particular term in the Google AdWords
  program. It also gives you a sense of the difficulty you will face if you want to own that search term,
letting you know if the competition is low, medium, or high.
    Your first instinct may be to go after the most popular terms, whether you are planning to use paid
       advertising or "organic" search engine optimization techniques. However, you may be better off
  picking slightly less used but still popular terms to point potential customers to specific products or
 services you offer.
 Then take a page from the best-selling book The New Rules of Marketing &PR: How to Use Social Media,
 Online Video, Mobile Applications, Blogs, News Releases, and Viral Marketing to Reach Buyers Directly. As
       author David Meerman Scott says, "You are what you publish." Hire writers and videographers to
   create case studies, white papers, and videos that naturally catch the attention of the search engines
       (and media) and educate the customers about the words you want to own. Videos and images have
 dominated over text ever since Google purchased YouTube.
     BuildDirect has dived into this approach. While it is armed with a clever name that describes what
        it does, co-founder and CEO Booth knows that customers don't think, "I'm looking to purchase
     building supplies direct." BuildDirect has created algorithms that help customers find products in
     just a handful of the thousands of building product categories — the ones the company has decided
 it can dominate. It has optimized its website so that it will show up high in natural Web searches —
     meaning unpaid searches — for terms such as "laminate flooring" and "hardwood flooring." If you go
    to the company's website, you'll see that it's prominently displaying these terms on the home page,
 along with photos. Are you doing the same?

                                                                           111

---

Scaling Up

BuildDirect has built its search engine rankings for its chosen terms by publishing unbiased con-
tent — which includes these keywords — to help customers tackle their building projects. These
articles, housed within the BuildDirect Learning Center, aren't thinly disguised commercials for
BuildDirect.com. They are useful, well-written articles that might otherwise appear in a home
remodeling publication. One division is the Laminate Flooring Learning Center. This section is
chockfull of useful information aimed at homeowners considering this flooring choice, such as a de-
scription of laminate flooring, with its pros and cons, an explanation of the manufacturing process,
a listing of the types of laminate flooring, cleaning and care information, and a buying guide.
If you were stumped about whether to go with wood flooring or laminate, the information would be
helpful — and that's why it pulls in visitors to the site. "Our key customer is Debby the Do-It-Your-
selfer," explains Booth. "We try to arm her with as much information as we can to help her make an
unbiased decision." People don't want to be sold; they want to be educated.

             The site's clientele extends beyond home improvement buffs. Many professionals in the building
trades also purchase materials through the site, and the content is sophisticated enough to give them
the information they need to serve their customers well, too.

By focusing the site on the customer and his or her needs — and not on tooting its own horn —
BuildDirect.com has taken control of the words it wants to own in its marketplace. And, as a result of
this smart strategy, much of its business comes in through customers' unpaid Web searches for terms such
as "laminate flooring," says Booth. This is what is driving the company's phenomenal revenue growth.
For more on how to use content to drive revenue, read Joe Pulizzi's highly insightful Epic Content Mar-
keting: How to Tell a Different Story, Break through the Clutter, and Win More Customers by Marketing Less.
If you focus on only one of the 7 Strata, this first one is the most important in driving revenue. The
rest help you defend your niche, simplify execution, and turn your revenue into huge profit.

            NOTE: Owning a word or two also applies to your personal brand (e.g., Tim Ferriss owns the term
       "4-Hour.") Here's a link to a piece Verne wrote as a LinkedIn Influencer titled "Your Career Success
   Hinges on One Word: Do You Know It?": http://tiny.cc/success-one-word
Dominating the search engines isn't the only test. Your identity as the maker of the safest car or the
         "king of enhanced waters" might be well-entrenched in the minds of the right people, and therefore
it might not be necessary to pop high in searches. The key is picking a niche and owning (or creating)
the words in the minds of the people you want as your core customers.

          Sandbox and Brand Promises

                             KEY RESOURCES: Robert H. Bloom and Dave Conti's book The Inside Advantage: The
                Strategy That Unlocks the Hidden Growth in Your Business, and Rick Kash and David Calhoun's
                        book How Companies Win: Profiting From Demand-Driven Business Models No Matter What
   Business You're In

112

---

                                                                    The 7 Strata of Strategy

There are four key decisions to make on stratum 2:                     Strategr:S
 1.Who/Where are your (juicy red) core customers?
 2What are you really selling them?
 3What are your three Brand Promises?
 4.What methods do you use to measure whether you're keeping
 those promises? (We call these the Kept Promise Indicators,
 a play on the standard definition of KPIs.)
Who/Where: Bloom and Conti, authors of The Inside Advantage, im-
plore companies to get crystal clear about Who and Where their juicy
red core customer is — the customer from whom the business can mine
the most profit over time. Their warning is to define customers beyond
    a pure demographic. For Nestlé's Juicy Juice, pigeonholed early on as just another sugary drink for
        children, Bloom's team redefined the Who as "a mom who wants her young children to get more
nutrition." For a particular nurse-staffing firm, the core customer is actually members of its team —
   the travelling nurses it places with hospitals — due to a global shortage of nurses. Bloom and Conti's
book will help you discern a concrete definition of your core customer.

      Kash and Calhoun, authors of How Companies Win, further suggest that there is a niche within any
     industry that represents no more than 10% of the total customers but holds a disproportionate per-
    centage of the profit — what are termed profit pools. For instance, in the dog food industry, Kash's
       team segmented the market based on the relationship between an owner and her dog (vs. the size
      of the dog) and found a group of owners they labeled "performance fuelers." These are owners who
       are active — biking, hiking, jogging, and running — and want their dog with them. Though they
    represent only 7% of all dog owners, they account for more than 25% of the profitability in dog food
   purchases. The key is finding that same niche in your industry and owning it through a highly focused
product or service offering.
   Once you know more specifically Who they are, it's much easier to know Where to find them. The perfor-
 mance fuelers can be reached locally on a few key trails and via a couple of popular news sites and blogs.
   For BuildDirect.com, as mentioned above, the core customer is "Debby the Do-It-Yourselfer," not simply
   women ages 35 to 55. She represents a very specific persona and is highly predictable in where she can
  be reached — reading certain publications, shopping certain sites, and searching for specific products.
What: Bloom and Conti suggest that the primary mistake companies make in describing What they
  sell is to focus on the benefits and features. All sales are emotional, initiated through the heart ("No
    one was ever fired for buying IBM") and then justified logically by the head. That's why established
brands play on people's fear of purchasing from a new entry in the marketplace.
Summit Business Media (now Summit Professional Networks), an example that Bloom and Conti use
  in their book, offers "the indispensable source of authoritative information, data and analysis for the
  well-informed financial professional." The concepts that the company is irreplaceable and helps its cli-
  ents stay well-informed play to the financial professional's emotional needs as much as business needs.
                                                                                 113

---

Scaling Up

        Kash and Calhoun add that the What must encompass a 100% solution. Many business leaders are
     easily distracted by shiny objects; they move on too quickly to another product line, distribution
     channel, or niche before thoroughly locking down an existing one with an offering that completely
does the job a customer needs to accomplish.

           Winterhalter Gastronom GmbH, a German manufacturer of commercial dishwashing equipment
     dominates the market in selling to large restaurant and hotel chains. These companies operate in a
     24/7 environment and need dishes that not only are clean but look clean. Winterhalter engineered a
    complete solution for this niche, which included supplying water conditioners, specialty detergents,
and a global quick-turnaround repair service to customers.

       Brand Promises: Debby the Do-It-Yourselfer wants laminate flooring, and BuildDirect grabs her
        attention. So why should she buy from BuildDirect vs. its competitors? There have to be some
    compelling reasons that are evident from the moment she visits BuildDirect's website. We call these
reasons the Brand Promises. Most companies have three main Brand Promises, with one promise
that leads the list.
    For BuildDirect, the Brand Promises are "Best price, best customer service, and product expertise."
   "Best price" is the lead promise. The key is to define the company's Brand Promises quantitatively so
     they can be measured and monitored. Best price, in BuildDirect's case, means 40% to 50% less than
   anyplace else where you can purchase a similar product. BuildDirect has teams monitoring prices daily
 to make sure that it can keep this promise, or that it exits certain products and categories when it can't.
              WARNING: Refrain from using the words "quality," "value," or "service" as Brand Promises. They
   are too vague. Their definitions may vary, depending on the group of customers you're facing. McDon-
   ald's delivers what Verne considers high value and service if it's noon on Saturday and he and his wife
   are looking for a place where they can grab a quick bite with their four children without standing in a
   long line, and get a few minutes of peace while their two youngest play in the indoor playground.
   However, as a place to go on a date night, McDonald's has little value to them. McDonald's has defined
   its three measurable brand (value) promises as speed, consistency, and fun for kids. Getting clear about
   this and then delivering on these promises (including sending specific updates on these KPIs to its fran-
   chise owners daily) helped it pull off one of the most respected modern business turnarounds.
       The right Brand Promise isn't always obvious. Naomi Simson — founder of one of the fastest-grow-
        ing companies in Australia, RedBalloon — was sure she knew what to promise customers who want
to give experiences such as hot air balloon rides as gifts, rather than flowers and chocolates. Her
      promises included an easy-to-use website for choosing one of over 2,000 experiences; recognizable
packaging and branding (think Tiffany blue, only in red); and onsite support.
   It wasn't until a friend and client mentioned that she was using the website as a source of ideas — but
      buying the experiences directly from the vendors — that Simson had an "Aha!" moment. She realized
         that other customers might be doing the same thing, assuming that RedBalloon must be marking
     up the price of the experiences to cover the costs of the website, packaging, and onsite support. To
       grow the business, she promised customers they would pay no more for the experiences they bought
        through RedBalloon than for those purchased directly from the suppliers; otherwise, customers
114

---

                                                                         The 7 Strata of Strategy

 would get 100% of their fee refunded. The company calls this promise, which is technically a pricing
  guarantee, a "100% Pleasure Guarantee," to fit its brand.

          KPIs (Kept Promise Indicators): A promise has no weight if you don't keep it, resulting in lost cus-
          tomers and negative word-of-mouth publicity. Thus, it's critical that you know how to measure daily
  whether you're keeping your promises. At RedBalloon, Simson created a team that monitors pricing of
          its roughly 2,000 experiences to make sure that her customers can't buy the experiences more cheaply
         from other vendors. This isn't easy. The prices that suppliers charge for experiences like jet boating
  are subject to constant change because of factors such as fuel price fluctuations and insurance costs.

           Rackspace, offering cloud-based hosting, is another company that has mastered Brand Promise KPIs.
           The company, based in San Antonio, has built its brand around the promise of "fanatical support."
          This phrase appears smack in the middle of its website: "Fanatical Support: Over 1,400 trained cloud
  specialists, ready to help."

            The company measures its success in meeting this Brand Promise in three ways. The #1 measurement
       is uptime of a client's site. Rackspace offers a money-back guarantee if there's any downtime. If there is
      a problem, and a customer has to call in, that call will be answered in three rings. Rackspace installs red
  lights in its call centers that start to spin if a call is getting ready to go to a fourth ring. So that a customer
        doesn't get transferred, that call will be answered by a level two tech. That's what the customers want.
           Rackspace measures its performance on these three things, obsessively, every moment: uptime, calls
      answered in three rings or fewer, and lack of call transfers. The data is streaming all over its facilities.
  That's how Rackspace grew from nothing to a market cap of more than $6 billion in a dozen years.

           The BuildDirect team, similarly, has various Kept Promise Indicators it monitors to make sure ev-
           eryone is keeping the company's Brand Promise. Besides keeping an eye on competitors' pricing, the
           company has set countless measures for how long someone is on a certain landing page; how long it
takes for a customer service rep to respond to a question; and how simple it is for customers to find
 what they need and purchase it

  Brand Promise Guarantee (Catalytic Mechanism)

  KEY RESOURCE: Jim Collins' Harvard Business Review article             Strateay/
  "Turning Goals Into Results: The Power of Catalytic Mechanisms'

 It needs to hurt to break a promise; otherwise, it's too easy to let the
moment pass. This is why Collins labeled what we call a Brand Promise
Guarantee "a catalytic mechanism." By promising to refund 100% of a
RedBalloon gift voucher's cost if the customer can find the experience
 for a cheaper price, the company's guarantee puts heat on Simson's team
to keep their pricing promise.

The Brand Promise Guarantee also reduces customers' fear of buying
from you. In its early days, Oracle promised that enterprise software

                                                                                  115

---

Scaling Up

  would run twice as fast on its database software as on competitors' (in full-page ads on the back of
 Fortune magazine), or it would pay customers $1 million. Today, it offers a similar guarantee on its
  Exadata servers, except the reward is $10 million.

   Professional service firms might offer "short pay" guarantees, giving the client an option to pay
  whatever he thinks reasonable if there are issues. Though 99% of clients won't send less, the exis-
  tence of the guarantee gives them the confidence to do business with the service firm and encourages
  customers to share their concerns.

  In BuildDirect's case, the company offers a 30-day, no-questions-asked money-back guarantee — and
  it will even pay the return shipping. This catalytic mechanism assures Booth that his team is focused
  on helping a customer choose the right building products.

 Jim Collins' article will give you many more examples, as will the marketplace, when you start paying
 attention to what other companies are doing to guarantee their promises.

          One-PHRASE Strategy (Key to Making Money)

        KEY RESOURCE: Frances Frei and Anne Morriss' book                 Strategy
  Uncommon Service: How to Win by Putting Customers at the Core
   of Your Business

  Do you dare to be bad? Even risk alienating or upsetting a large segment
 of potential customers? This is precisely what highly profitable and
  successful companies do, according to Frances Frei, a leading strategy
  professor at Harvard Business School, and Anne Morriss.
 The first three Strata - owning mindshare, making and keeping
 promises, and backing them up with a guarantee — are expensive to
 accomplish. Making matters worse, in trying to address ever-increas-
 ing customer demands, the marketplace ends up "want, want, wanting'
 your margins away as the competition ramps up the "feature set and added services" war.
 This is why it's critical to identify your One-PHRASE Strategy. This phrase represents the key
lever in your business model that drives profitability and helps you choose which customer desires
to meet and which ones to ignore.

  Take IKEA's business model, based on "flat pack furniture." Since IKEA doesn't have to ship or ware-
house air, its costs are considerably lower than competitors', giving it a huge price advantage (its #1
Brand Promise). Add to this a flair for design and the best Swedish meatballs on the planet, and you
have three Brand Promises that outweigh all the things people hate about IKEA — and it's a long list!

 Yet it's specific trade-offs that power IKEA's success and serve as a blocking strategy to competitors.
 Others simply don't have the stomach to make people drive out of their way to visit a warehouse designed

116

---

                                                                              The 7 Strata of Strategy

   like a labyrinth, committing customers to a lengthy shopping experience. Pile on the need for assembly
   after the purchase, and it's crazy to think anyone would shop at IKEA. And a lot of people don't. But
   with just 6.8% global market share, IKEA is the world's largest and most profitable furniture chain.
   Apple's One-PHRASE Strategy has been its "closed architecture," the source of its phenomenal
       profitability. It also serves as a powerful blocking strategy, since Google and Microsoft are beyond
          the point of no return and would never be able to close their open systems. Again, most of the
       consumers in the world don't find the trade-offs worth it, but that hasn't kept Apple from being the
  most valuable company in the world.
     Frei and Morriss'overarching point is that great brands don't try to please everyone. Theyfocus on being
     the absolute best at meeting the needs/wants of a small but fanatical group of customers, and then dare
    to be the absolute worst at everything else. In turn, competitors, in striving to be the best in everyhig
     for everyone, actually achieve greatness in nothing — and end up as just average players in the industry
            We would share BuildDirect's One-PHRASE Strategy, but we strongly suggest that the company
      keep it a strategic secret. Again, you don't want to run around bragging about the key driver of your
  business's profitability, at least in the early years.
           The book Uncommon Service will give you a myriad number of examples and walk you through how
      to both "be bad" the right and highly profitable way and "be great" via a few Brand Promises. It takes
       real guts to ignore or even alienate 93% of customers, focusing instead on the 7% of the market that
  is fanatical about you and willing to put up with the trade-offs.

    Differentiating Activities (3 to 5 Hows)
    KEY RESOURCE: Michael E. Porter's classic 1996 Harvard Business Review article titled
    What Is Strategy?"
 Underpinning the One-PHRASE Strategy is a set of specific actions            Strategy:75
 that represent HOW you execute your business differently from the
competition. According to well-known strategist Michael Porter at Har-
vard Business School, it's at the "activity" level of the business where
true differentiation occurs and the business model is revealed.

        l NOTE: This is the first time the term "differentiation" has been
    used. Competitors can pursue owning the same words, make the same
          Brand Promises, and offer the same guarantees. However, it's HOW               5
     you deliver on your promises where differentiation occurs. Adds Kevin
    Daum, author of ROAR! Get Heard in the Sales and Marketing
    Jungle: A Business Fable, "a true differentiator can only be defined
    as something your competitor won't do or can't do without great effort
    or expense. Often these can take years to develop since if it can be done cheaply, easily and quickly
    it provides little or no competitive advantage.
                                                                                          117

---

 Scaling Up

   Again, Porter's point is that this happens at the activity level of the business, as illustrated by the
    Southwest Airlines case he highlights in his HBR article referenced above. Southwest has a handful of
    hard-to-copy activities that differentiate it from competitors. In addition to not having advance-res-
  ervation seating, the airline flies just one type of aircraft (reducing the number of repair parts needed
    and giving it more flexibility to swap pilots), utilizes second-tier airports to reduce landing fees.
       favors point-to-point flights vs. the more expensive hub-and-spoke system, and nurtures a quirky
 culture that helps customers put up with all the negatives.

   These activities serve as blocking factors precisely because al the other airlines, except copycat Ryan
    Air, are already invested in multiple aircraft, provide advance-reservation seating (it's hard to take
       away something away you've already given the customer), are locked into expensive hubs, and have
 built cultures of unhappy employees!

       The key is to choose HOW you go about delivering your products and services in your industry in
    ways that are nearly impossible for your competition to copy. Notice that these activities derive from
            Southwest's One-PHRASE Strategy — "Wheels Up" (its expensive hunks of metal make money
 only when they are in the air) — helping the airline achieve this key result that drives profitability.
 Each layer of the 7 Strata of Strategy builds upon and reinforces the others

   In BuildDirect's case, the reason it can offer such outstanding pricing, service, and guarantees is that
     there are a handful of unique ways in which it has structured the business model that afford it the
 ability to deliver on its Brand Promises. Specifically, BuildDirect:
  1. Requires a minimum order of a pallet of material
  2. Carries no name-brand products and instead provides a distribution channel for a number
  of small manufacturers with outstanding products
  3.Requires cash in advance, even on its largest orders, which can be in the six figures
 A particular competitor might share one of these approaches with BuildDirect, but it's the unique
   combination of all three that underpins its differentiation. And it's the distasteful nature of some of
       these activities — derived from its secretive One-PHRASE Strategy — that blocks the competition
from copying them.
Read Porter's article, along with Uncommon Service, and establish a set of activities — "how" you run
the business — that is different from the norms of the industry, helps you drive profitability, and
blocks the competition. This is a lot for a handful of activities to accomplish, but this is the source
 of your differentiation. Do the work!

As Porter summarizes, "A company can outperform rivals only if it can establish a difference that it
can preserve."





118

---

                                                                         The 7 Strata of Strategy

                X-Factor (10x-100x Underlying Advantage)
   KEY RESOURCE: Verne's Fortune article titled "The X-Factor": http://tiny.cc/the-X-Factor
 Why would BuildDirect allow us to share the details of its strategy?    Stralegy: 7 Sra
 It's because of a hidden X-Factor — a 10x-100x underlying competitive
  advantage over its rivals. Normally invisible to customers, this edge
  underpins the strategic activities described above and blocks compet-
 itors from even trying to copy BuildDirect. And it typically addresses
  a huge, established choke point in an industry.

  Once you have such an advantage, it will usually let you decimate the
  competition, allowing you to sustain the kind of rapid growth that                    6
   BuildDirect has sustained for more than a decade.

   As Verne has discussed in Fortune, Chris Sullivan made the Outback
      Steakhouse restaurant chain successful by focusing on an early X-Factor. After working extensively
     in the restaurant industry, he knew the primary challenge for large restaurant chains is maintaining
      consistency in food quality and service. But why? As he continued to peel back the layers, he con-
     cluded that it was due to the industry's average six-month turnover of general managers in stores, a
   statistic considered to be "just the way it is in the restaurant business." Good managers were typically
       moved around to take over for bad managers, and great managers would eventually leave and start
  their own restaurants.

         Recognizing manager turnover as the choke point in the industry, Sullivan and his team asked
 themselves a key question: What if we could keep a restaurant manager in the same restaurant
       for five to 10 years? This would represent a 10x to 20x improvement over the existing situation
in the industry.
    The key for Sullivan turned out to be an unusual compensation plan (think "differentiated activity").
      Young people interested in becoming managers were asked to "invest" $25,000 in an Outback restau-
         rant. Imagine one of your children coming home and sharing that they found a job managing a
     restaurant. After expressing your initial skepticism ("What, managing a steakhouse after obtaining a
     four-year degree?"), you get around to the all-important question: "So what does it pay?" Whereupon
  she explains that she actually needs to pay the company to get the job!

Here was the deal Sullivan pioneered: New managers would invest $25,000 and commit to staying
     for five years. Outback would take the first three years to train them to run a restaurant, paying a
        competitive wage. During the last two years, the new managers would get to run a restaurant on
      their own. If they hit certain performance milestones by the fifth year, they would get a $100,000
         bonus — a 4x return on their investment — which would vest over the next four years. If they
     signed on to stay at the same restaurant another five years, they would receive the $100,000 in one
lump sum, plus $500,000 worth of stock that would vest over the next five years.


119

---

  Scaling Up

     The company ended up turning a bunch of people in their 20s into millionaires; 90% of managers stayed
 in the same restaurant for five years; and 80% stayed for 10 years or more. Most important, Outback's
      theory was correct. The longevity of management led to consistency in products and service, helping
     Outback become the third-largest restaurant chain in the US, and the most profitable, before Sullivan
stepped aside as CEO. (He's now back turning around the company as this book goes to print.)
       So how do you figure out an X-Factor? Start by asking: What is the one thing I hate most about my
       industry? What is driving me nuts? What is the choke point constraining the company? It could be a
  massive cost factor. It could be a massive time factor. The challenge is that you're often too close to the
    situation and as blind as everyone else to the real problems that have been accepted as industry norms.

      One clue to the source of the X-Factor is going back to your last 10 trade association meetings and
      gathering the titles of the various breakout sessions. Put them in an Excel spreadsheet, and see if
      there are any patterns of challenges facing your industry over the past decade. By focusing on these
      roadblocks, and figuring out a 10x to 100x advantage, you'll have a huge leg up on the competition.

     And you don't have to run a business the size of Outback to put this principal into practice. Barrett
       Ersek, founder of lawn care company Happy Lawn, reduced the typical sales process from three weeks
      to three minutes. Using the latest digital technology and tax map data to estimate lawn measurements
     and offer instant quotes while customers were on the phone, he eliminated the need to have salespeople
     visit prospects' homes and take manual measurements, write up quotes, and then schedule appointments.
     It's not surprising that industry giant ServiceMaster bought Ersek's $10 million company. At Holganix,
     Ersek's new company — which manufactures and distributes organic fertilizer — he's identified another
  X-Factor. But, like his One-PHRASE Strategy, he's keeping it a secret.

  BuildDirect's X-Factor also remains a secret, as it should. But you can go to Verne's Fortune article
  for additional examples. Then start brainstorming with your strategic thinking team about some
 possible 10x advantages.

  Profit per X (Economic Engine) and BHAG® (10- to 25-Year Goal)

   KEY RESOURCE: Jim Collins' Hedgehog Concept in Good to                     Strategy: St
   Great: Why Some Companies Make the Leap... And Others Don't

The final two decisions cap the strategy with a single overarching KPI
that Jim Collins labels "Profit per X" and a measurable 10- to 25-year goal
referred to as a BHAG®, a term that Collins and Jerry I. Porras intro-
  duced in their book Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies.
 Both decisions round out Collins' strategic framework that he calls the
  Hedgehog Concept in Good to Great.

The Profit per X metric represents the underlying economic engine of
 the business and provides the leaders with a single KPI they can track
maniacally to monitor the progress of the business (a great luxury to have).
120

---

                                                       The 7 Strata of Strategy

    Though the numerator can be any metric you like - profit, revenue, gross margin, pilots, routes,
      etc. - the denominator is fixed and represents your company's unique approach to scaling the
  business. And it generally ties back to the One-PHRASE Strategy (all of this stuff links together).
    While most airlines focus on profit per mile or profit per seat, Southwest focuses on maximizing
profit per plane, which aligns with its One-PHRASE Strategy of "Wheels Up.

  As we saw in Alan Rudy's story in Chapter 2, he took a similar approach in the business of answering
   phones. While everyone else focused on revenue per minute and profit per minute, he looked at the
  industry through a different lens and drove the business to maximize profit per booked appointment.
   The result: revenue reached an industry high of $5 per minute, vs. an average of $1.25 per minute.
At Gazelles, we used to obsess over profit per event; now it's profit per long-term client.

Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG®)
 As leaders set the ultimate long-term, 10- to 25-year goal for their companies, we see a lot of sloppy
      work - a random number or statement of aspiration with no real connection to a company's un-
derlying strategy.

Microsoft's BHAG®
"When Paul Allen and I started Microsoft over 30 years ago, we had big dreams about software. We had
dreams about the impact it could have. We talked about a computer on every desk and in every home. It's
  been amazing to see so much of that dream become a reality and touch so many lives. I never imagined
what an incredible and important company would spring from those original ideas."
      — Bill Gates at a news conference announcing plans for full-time philanthropy work and part-
time Microsoft work, June 15, 2006, Redmond, Washington


Collins placed the BHAG® in the center of his Hedgehog Concept, noting that it must fully align
with all the components of your strategy. It's why we've made it the seventh and final stratum. And
we've discovered that the best unit of measure for the BHAG® is the X from the Profit per X.

      NOTE: Your BHAG® should be measured in the same units as the X. This is a key point. Since
Southwest Airlines is focused on profit per plane, it made sense that the company set a long-term goal
to have X number of planes in the air. The Profit per X and the BHAG® need to align very tightly

The BHAG® must also align with the Purpose of the company, as we explain in the chapter on the
One-Page Strategic Plan. RedBalloon set an aggressive BHAG to sell 2 million experiences in 10
years, a goal established in 2005, when it sold only 7,500. Simson, founder and CEO, reasoned that to
truly change gifting in Australia forever (tapping people's desire for experiences vs. stuff), RedBalloon
needed to touch the lives of 10% of Australians. At the time, there were 20 million Australians, so
reaching 2 million experiences sold was the goal. It then made sense for RedBalloon's primary KPI
to be profit per experience.
                                                                                            121

---

 Scaling Up

 BuildDirect's business model is very different. It operates in the retail building-supply industry, where
 competitors focus on metrics like profit per square foot of retail space, profit per SKU, and same-store
    sales growth. Booth has built the company based on maximizing profit per "building product category."
       To reach Fortune 500 status by 2023, Booth has set a BHAG® to dominate just 20 of the more than
 1,000 specific product categories (2% of all building categories — that's hyperspecialization). Figuring
  that each category represents $500 million to $2 billion in revenue, BuildDirect should reach $10 billion
  to $20 billion in revenue in just 20 short years since its launch, if it is not purchased in the meantime.

                                               7 Strata Summary

  BuildDirect's strategy can be stated simply, but there is nothing simple about it. If you're a "Debby the
    Do-It-Yourselfer" in North America (it's expanding internationally) and want laminate flooring, you'll
 find it easily via the search engines. Debby will likely find the promise of 40% to 50% savings an appealing
 value proposition, in light of the access she will get to the company's expertise and the ease of purchas-
 ing from the comfort of her home or office, with products delivered directly to the construction site.

     And Debby has no fear of being sold something she doesn't want. If, for any reason, she doesn't want
     what was shipped, she has 30 days to send it back, and BuildDirect will pay the return shipping. How
     can Booth afford to offer this? BuildDirect has a secret One-PHRASE Strategy that makes it a lot of
      money. And though elements of its model are unpleasant for customers, the Brand Promises outweigh
     how the company goes about its business (e.g., if Debby wants this laminate flooring, she'll need to
   order at least a pallet of material; be willing to forgo the big brand names; and pay fully in advance).

    BuildDirect doesn't mind that we share its strategy because its top-secret X-Factor, which took years
  to perfect, provides a 10x advantage over any competitor that might try to copy the rest of its strategy.
      That's why Booth figures that the company needs to dominate just 20 of more than 1,000 categories
       to reach Fortune 500 status. And to monitor its progress, BuildDirect focuses on maximizing its
      profit per building category, helping its leaders know when they've maxed out a category and need
 to exit it or add a new one.

  The payoff is huge if you figure out all of the attributes of the 7 Strata. As with all of our tools, nail
        down what you can and keep moving. Set up your strategic thinking team, have each member read
    (and master) one of the referenced books or articles, and start testing your theories and honing your
    strategy to perfection. You'll know you're on the right track when sustained revenue growth and great
 margins start coming more easily.

    It's very difficult work, and your strategic thinking team may feel both lost and outright dumbfounded
      in the beginning, but trust the process. Keep meeting each week and talking through the ideas, and
      answers will come to you. If you need help, Gazelles has some top-notch strategy consultants, with
 experience helping many companies work through these Strata, who can help you do some of the
heavy lifting.
In the last chapter of the "Strategy" section, we'll take several decisions from the 7 Strata and integrate
them into the OPSP: the one-page vision around which to align the entire company.
122

---

   8
   THE ONE-PAGE
   STRATEGIC PLAN
   The Tool for Strategic Planning



        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The bigger your company, and the faster it's growing, the harder it is to keep
    everyone on the same page. The problem, of course, is that there isn't a single page around which to align.
     Instead, there are likely more than a dozen actual and imaginary ones, along with memos and emails, each
                                      puori  c yop' visnval ratgaln isManhes
    may be riddled with unclear and even contradictory statements about your company's identity, what it does,
   and how it accomplishes this. This chapter will introduce you to the One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP), updated
      since it was first introduced more than a decade ago and used by more than 40,000 companies worldwide.
It's a simple yet powerful tool that helps you edit down your vision to a single, action-oriented page. We'll also
     introduce the SWT, a tool to augment the traditional SWOT analysis as you prepare your OPSP, along with
    a Vision Summary which provides a succinct way to communicate your vision.


    The One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP) has been critical to the growth of JSJ Corporation, the Michi-
      gan-based parent company of six durable-goods firms. With 2,700 employees spread out around the
    world, the family-owned firm, which is approaching its 100th anniversary, began using the OPSP in 2006.
    After hearing about the OPSP, Nelson Jacobson, the CEO of JSJ, sent the company's head of orga-
     nizational development to a two-day "Mastering the Rockefeller Habits" workshop. Executives also
    spoke with leaders of a local company who were using it, to learn how the tool had helped them scale
    up and manage business performance.
    "I had been the chief operating officer of JSJ since about 2000," recalls Jacobson, a member of the
    third generation of one of the founding families. "We went through the post-9/11 recession. At that
    point, it became a very different company. When I became the CEO in 2005, I was searching for a
    tool that would make us a more cohesive operating entity. The OPSP gave us a way of tracking and
    driving business performance.'

    Everyone on the Same Page
    Confident that the OPSP could help JSJ grow cohesively, Jacobson introduced it to his seven-member
    leadership team. "I was looking for something to bring the company together," he recalls.
                                                                                             123

---

  Scaling Up

  Each of JSJ's six companies has a different focus, so each creates and updates its own OPSP. These,
  in turn, influence JSJ's plan for the entire company. There is a rhythm to this: Each business typically
  develops its own plan in time for the company's Annual Operating Planning session in October. Over
  the next several months, the six companies' plans get finalized, so JSJ can utilize them to further
  shape its own plan. JSJ's plan, in turn, becomes final at a February board meeting.

  Jacobson says the OPSP helped the leadership team make one of its toughest decisions: to sell one
  of its companies, a lithographic printing firm in California. "It helped us to evaluate which were the
  right businesses to hold," he recalls. "That one didn't fit." Fortunately, the parent sold it at a good
  time. "We used those funds to invest in and grow the remaining businesses," Jacobson says.

  JSJ's efforts have taken commitment, but there's been a big, measurable payoff. The company has
  developed new technologies, launched additional product lines, and expanded geographically as a
  direct result of decisions it made while using the OPSP. "We've had continuously improving profit
  and growth since we started," says Jacobson. "The OPSP has brought better alignment, account
  ability, and execution."

  In this chapter, we'll examine in detail the components of an effective OPSP, and how JSJ and tens
  of thousands of other firms have used it to drive engagement, alignment, and focus throughout their
  organizations. But first, we want to introduce a simplified version of the OPSP: the Vision Summary.
  Many companies can start with this and then progress to the more comprehensive OPSP as their
  sophistication in strategic planning increases.

                               Vision Summary
  The Vision Summary provides a simplified OPSP framework        Strategy: Vision Summary             Gazelles
  for companies just getting started with implementing the       CORE VALUES                 PURPOSE  BRAND PROMISES
  Rockefeller Habits and for firms with 50 employees or fewer.
  For larger firms that are taking advantage of the more detailed
 aspects of the OPSP, the Vision Summary provides a one-page
 format to communicate key aspects of the company's vision to            BHAG
  employees, customers, investors, and the broader community.    STRATEGIC                            PRIORITIES
 At scalingup.com, you can download a copy of the Vision Sum-    3-5yr    1y                          Qtr
  mary without the Gazelles logo in the upper right. Then list
the following for your company:
  Core Values                                                             Gos
  Purpose                                                                     8
  Brand Promises                                                              :
  Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG)
We detailed these strategic components of the Vision Summary in the two previous chapters in this
 "Strategy" section. They represent the key components of the company's vision that every employee
124

---

                                                                             The OPSP

should know and understand thoroughly, making this summary useful as a key onboarding tool for
new employees.
Under these components is a place to list the strategic priorities. In the first column, list the three-
to five-year Key Thrusts/Capabilities from the OPSP. These are the handful of major medium-term
priorities, which we will describe in more detail later.
In the middle column, list the year's #1 Priority and the Key Initiatives necessary to achieve it. And
in the last column, list the quarter's #1 Priority and the "Rocks" required to reach this goal. We wil
provide more detail on how to set these priorities in "The Priority" chapter.
These strategic components and priorities provide a quick snapshot of the company's vision. Un-
derneath them is a place for every employee or team to personalize the plan. There, they can list
a handful of key performance indicators (KPIs), priorities, and a Critical Number for the quarter,
which should support and align with the company's vision. These come from decisions made when
completing the last column of the OPSP, and we detail them later in this chapter, as well
We encourage team members to post this Vision Summary in their cubicles, their offices, or the cabs
of their sanitation trucks as visual reminders of the organization's strategic plan and their part in
making it a reality.

                    One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP)
Many people have dreams. However, a vision is a dream with a plan: a One-Page Strategic Plan.
To flesh out the vision, you need to answer seven basic questions:  A vision is a dream
who, what, when, where, how, why, and the often challenging ques-   with a plan."
tion, "But should we or shouldn't we?" These questions anchor the
seven columns of the OPSP. If you ever feel confused by the
terminology that comes with strategic planning, always come back to these seven simple questions.
The terminology can be hard to follow. We are working to get our industry to align around a common
language, agreeing on standard definitions of vision, purpose, values, priorities, etc. We are also using
the OPSP to integrate the various visioning frameworks of thought leaders like Jim Collins, Gary
Hamel, Jack Stack, and Stephen Covey, to name a few.
The tool is designed to align both horizontally and vertically, providing a logical framework to organize
your strategic vision and guarantee that you have all the pieces to make it whole. The physical structure of
the OPSP forces prioritization and simplicity. There's not a lot of space to write, so you must be concise.
As you fill in the document, think of it as a giant crossword or Sudoku puzzle. Figure out what
you can, and let that help you determine the rest (e.g., Purpose and Brand Promise will triangulate
back to the BHAG®). "Get it down; then get it right" is our mantra. A good plan now is better
than a great plan too late.
                                                                                         125

---

Scaling Up

  "Get it down;           There is one other important design element to the OPSP. Jim Collins
  then get it right."     discovered that enduring companies operate with a dual dynamic that
                          he labeled "preserve the core/stimulate progress." This duality is built
                          into the OPSP. The first three columns describe the core, which holds
steady over time. The balance of the plan, as you move right, becomes more dynamic, stimulating
progress to meet the trends, opportunities, and challenges of the marketplace.
To summarize, the OPSP process provides the organization with:
  1.A framework that details your corporate vision.
  2. A common language with which to express that vision.
  3.A well-developed routine for keeping the vision current.

                              To get started with the OPSP, download an editable document, available in various languages from
                          scalingup.com. If you print it out, place the first page to the left of the second page. This will give
                             you a continuous single-page document on an 11-by-17-inch (A3) piece of paper. It will be helpful
                          to have a physical copy as you read this chapter (a three-quarter-size copy appears at the front of the
"Strategy" section). A sample completed plan can also be found at scalingup.com.
   NOTE: The OPSP is for internal consumption. It's designed to help a team get the technical aspects of
   the strategic plan correct vs. craft marketing messages (e.g., taglines). However, once you construct the
   plan, it will be faster and less costly, if you are using an outside marketing or ad agency, to create the
   external messaging to communicate your vision to employees, customers, and the broader community.

 OPSP Experiences: Holganix, Markitforce, and Towne Park
                            Barrett Ersek, co-founder of natural-lawn-care firm Holganix in Pennsylvania, has created five
                             companies over 20 years, his first when he was 17 years old. He describes the OPSP and other
                          strategic habits of this methodology as a blueprint for what he needs to do to grow his business.
                             When I was in my 20s, I was running a business with a checkbook in my back pocket, and then
 for the first time in my life, someone gave me an instruction booklet," he says.
                              For Alan Higgins of Australia-based Markitforce, a point-of-sale and warehouse fulfillment
                              firm, the OPSP is an "automatic decision-making machine." The founder and chief engagement
                          officer notes: "If there's ever a fork in the road or a decision to be made, we refer back to the
                            tool to see if we're on strategy. If we're not, we chat about whether we should walk away from
the opportunity."
                           The OPSP is one of the most valuable tools at 9,000-employee Towne Park, a hospitality services
                            firm based in Maryland, according to founder Jerry South. "It allows me to think strategically
                             about the business and compartmentalizes some of the big decisions we are wrestling with and
                           breaks them down to bite-sized pieces," South says. "Plus, it creates the clarity needed around
 what's important in the business."


126

---

                                                                                                      The OPSP

Let's walk through the seven columns of the OPSP:
Column 1 (Should/Shouldn't): Lists a handful of rules defining the boundaries for decision-making —
the Shoulds or Shouldn'ts represented by the Core Values.

Column 2(Why): Expresses the impact the company wants to make in the world (or neighborhood),
providing the meaning — the Why — behind everyone's efforts. It requires two main decisions:
 Purpose (often referred to as "mission"): the aspirational North Star or Southern Cross
 providing direction to the business
 BHAG® (Big Hairy Audacious Goal): the measurable piece of the Purpose that the business
 can achieve in the next 10 to 25 years

Column 3 (Where): Defines Where the company is headed in the next three to five years. Includes
 a description of the Sandbox in which the company wants to play (e.g., in terms of customers, ge-
                              y,  prodcervice  erab ranroios usrs. It
summarizes a handful of major Capabilities and Key Thrusts the company must pursue.
Column 4 (What): Describes What results need to be achieved in the next 12 months. These are
driven by a measurable #1 Priority (Critical Number) and a handful of "Rocks" (see Pages 132-133).
Column 5 (How): Details How the company plans to achieve its vision, focused on a measurable
"next step" 90-day #1 Priority (Critical Number) and a handful of "Rocks."
Column 6 (Finish Lines and Fun): Describes the theme, celebration, and rewards associated with
the #1 Priority for the quarter or year. The theme celebrations give everyone a definitive finish line
and a chance to have some fun.

Column 7 (Who): De-         Strategy: Ore Paga Strategc Pan (OPSP Cryreani                            Gazelles
lineates Who is account-      People Fliputation Drvers)                      Sharehoiden             Recordresping
                              Employes    Custorners                                         Makew/Buy
able for various aspects      VALLESBELES  PUPO   TAPGETE P-4                 OL I Y                  THEME     YOUR ACCOUNTABLITY
of the OPSP, detailing                                                        W Erdy         on                 Yuk
the KPIs, Rocks, and                                                          Mad Cap
Critical Numbers for
each employee or team.                                                        Key b    Bock
Last, the When question       1            2 3                                          5             6         7
is represented by each
column's time frame.







127

---

 Scaling Up

 Filling In the OPSP

     Alignment and clarity start at the very top of the OPSP with the Organization Name. Organizations
      must align around a name that customers and employees (including the receptionist answering the
       phones) can remember and say. Finding that everyone called the company FedEx, Federal Express
      changed its name. Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing worked for a while, but the corporation is
        3M today. HVLS Fan Company, whose large industrial fans were designed to be high-volume and
     low-speed, adopted the name Big Ass Fans after years of having customers use that moniker instead.
      Today, the business — recently renamed Big Ass Solutions — is one of the most widely recognized,
      fastest-growing companies in its niche. Other companies have exceedingly long and complex names
     that include generic terms like "Group" or "Inc." which no one ever uses. Consider dropping those
 extra words.

     The "Organization Name" line can be used to signify whether the strategic vision applies only to a
   division or department within a firm. At JSJ, each of the six companies will list its respective name
 (e.g., "Sparks, a JSJ Business").
 Finish the title area by adding your own name and the date. A few key points:
 1.Some of you have names that are difficult to pronounce and spell. It might be best to
   simplify them, like many of our clients in Malaysia who go by their initials (hi, H.K.
   and C.K.!) or like my friend Nick Alexos, whose original name was Nicholas Alexopoulos.
   Or mimic performers and consider adopting a more memorable and business-friendly
   nickname (Gordon Sumner is known the world over as Sting).
 2.To eliminate confusion over whether the month or day is listed first in the date, we suggest
   trying the global standard used by Cisco: the two-digit designation of the day, followed by
   the three-letter designation of the month, and then the four-digit designation of the year
   (e.g., 02 Feb 2022.)

We hate to be so picky, but alignment starts with getting agreement on the organization's name, your
name, and the format of the date.

 Strengths, Weaknesses, and Trends

Along the bottom of the OPSP is a place to summarize the company's top three inherent Strengths/
Core Competencies and Weaknesses. There is also room to highlight the top six trends that will
likely hit the company and its industry like meteors. These serve as the foundation upon which the
Vision is built. Later in this chapter, we'll introduce a new one-page SWT tool to help you fill this
in. It supplements the age-old SWOT that companies have used for decades.

                                  D                                           ::

   Strengths              Weaknesses    Trends               Trends
 Conygrr20's Gaaks ine                  Coynayr Pg 15 Gaaes, inc
128

---

                                                                                        The OPSP

OPSP Column 1: Core Values/Beliefs

 Moving up to the body of the form, list the firm's Core Values in the first column.    CORE VALUES/BELIEFS
                                                                                         (Should/Shouldn')
These three to eight phrases broadly define the shoulds and shouldn'ts that govern
your company's underlying decisions and describe the personality of the organization.
      "The Core" chapter discusses in more detail Core Values and how to use them to
drive the people (HR) systems inside your company.

          NOTE: Do not feel compelled to call these concepts Core Values. Label them
however you like: beliefs, rules, the HP Way. The key is to figure out what they are    1
 so your team can utilize them to keep the culture strong and drive decisions as the
company scales.

OPSP Column 2: Purpose, Profit per X, and BHAG®
If the first column represents the soul of the organization (or organism), then col-
umn 2 presents its heart. Column 2 answers some very basic Why questions: Why is                        B
this company doing what it's doing? What's its higher purpose? Why should I have
passion for what we're doing?
It also provides a clue as to why certain seemingly small incidents send the founder    PURPOSE
                                                                                            (Why)
into a tirade, while other situations, which may be bigger and more costly, slide
by almost without comment. For example, Gazelles' Purpose revolves around the
word "freedom." A situation that challenges our freedom, such as unnecessary
bureaucracy, absolutely brings up the hair on the back of Verne's neck.
                                                                                              Actions
Find what rankles the CEO in your firm, and you'll have a leg up on figuring out             Li  P BHAG
your company's purpose. An example is Wal-Mart's purpose: "To give ordinary             2
folks the chance to buy the same things as rich people." Sam Walton, founder of
Wal-Mart, was bothered by the inequality between the rich and poor and had a
passion for giving people in rural areas access to reasonably priced retail goods.
Again, "The Core" chapter provides more detail on how to determine the company's        Profit per X    B(
Purpose and how to use it to create a stump speech the leadership team can use to
ignite employees' hearts.                                                               BHAG
Under the Purpose on the OPSP, you'll see an "Actions" section. It's easy for
companies to create a list of Core Values, Purpose, and BHAG®, and then forget
them. This "Actions" box is meant to drive a quarterly conversation about what's necessary, in the
short run, to keep these long-term Vision items alive in the company and generate a handful of
actions to bolster these core elements.
We had a client with a Core Value that emphasized the importance of having some "serious fun"
as part of its culture. Having just gone public (which is no fun), the executive team decided at the
                                                                                                        129

---

Scaling Up

next quarterly planning session to present the employees with a foosball table as a symbol that they
didn't want to lose this fun aspect of the culture just because they were now part of a public company.
This is the kind of specific action item you would list under "Actions" in the Purpose column —
specific ways to reinforce the Core Values, Purpose, and BHAG® in the next 90 days.
The Profit per X and BHAG® (Big Hairy Audacious Goal) were discussed in detail in "The 7 Stra-
ta of Strategy" chapter. To review, the Profit per X is a single KPI that represents the company's
primary economic engine (e.g., the driving element of the business model). Southwest Airlines, for
example, has a relentless focus on profit per airplane vs. other airlines' focus of profit per seat or
profit per mile. The BHAG® represents the quantifiable 10- to 25-year target that aligns with the
Purpose and Profit per X.
The key is for everything to align in column 2 and tell a compelling story that excites and engages
the people to scale up the business. For a moving example, watch this five-minute 25th-anniversa-
ry tribute to Southwest Airlines' employees featuring then-President, CEO, and Chairman Herb
Kelleher: http://tiny.cc/Southwest-tribute

OPSP Column 3: Targets, Sandbox, and Brand Promises
As we move to column 3, the plan becomes more detailed, listing specific financial targets and pri-
orities over the next three to five years. These define the "camps" on the way to Everest (BHAG®),
recalling the analogy shared in "The Overview."
The first decision is choosing whether to look ahead three, four, or five years. The key      TARGETS (3-5 YRS.)
quetn to ask  "In what te ame o we pan to double the revenue/ize  te                               (Whero)
                                                                                            Future Date
company?" If the plan is to grow at 15% per year, then you'll double in five years.           Revorues
                                                                                              Profit
If it's 25% per year, then choose a three-year time frame. If you're growing 100%            Mkt. Cap/Cash
per year, then your company is living in "dog years," when one year is like three                   Sandbox
to five for everyone else. In this case, choose a one-year time frame for column 3,          Key Thrusts/Capabilities
a quarterly time frame for column 4, and a one-month time frame for column 5
(your month is like everyone else's quarter).                                                       3
Since everything between the BHAG® and the next 90 days is a WAG (wild-ankle
guess), the three- to five-year financial targets might as well be aspirational and
aggressive. Specifically, looking at the top of column 3:
1.Future Date: Set the ending date for this medium-term planning period                     Brand Promise KPls       20
   (e.g., 31 Dec 2019).
 Revenues: Consider hitting a target revenue that's twice what it is today.                 Brand Promises
   Again, this is the definition of a camp on the way to your Everest: the point
   at which you're going to double the size of the business next.
 .Profit: Consider targeting three times industry average profitability.
   This is the definition of a great vs. good company, so go for it!
130

---

                                                                                      The OPSP

 4.Mkt. Cap/Cash: If you lead a public company, set a goal for what the company will be
  worth (market cap). If you're at a private company, set a target for how much cash you
  would like to have in the bank or the market share you'd like to own within your industry.

     Next, summarize the Sandbox in which the company plans to play over the next three to five years.
    This is a summary of Stratum 2 off the 7 Strata worksheet: a short description of the core customers
(Who and Where) and What it is you plan to sell them.
Then jump to the bottom of the column and clearly articulate the key needs you're going to satisfy
     for this Sandbox: the measurable Brand Promises. Note these specific metrics in the Brand Promise
     KPIs (Kept Promise Indicators) box. Recall from the last chapter how Rackspace measured Fanatical
Support in terms of answering customer calls within three rings. FedEx's promise of 10 a.m. delivery
and Oracle's Exadata 5x promise are additional examples of Brand Promise KPIs.
    Once you've decided on the financial targets, Sandbox, and Brand Promises, choose the three to five
      Key Thrusts/Capabilities the company must pursue over the next three to five years. These might
      include a number of important acquisitions or the launch of a new product or service line. They
    might also represent a dramatic refocus of the core business, like Steve Jobs' decision, when he be-
    came Apple's CEO in 1997, to pull it out of all of its current business lines and focus on producing
just two desktops and two laptops.
      For Gazelles, some earlier Key Thrusts/Capabilities included international expansion outside of
      the US and Canada; the launch of a software-as-a-service offering to support our methodologies;
     the creation of a high-end membership organization; a significant global expansion of our coaching
 organization; and the creation of an online learning platform.
       These examples represent the kinds of significant medium-term priorities that a company should
    list in column 3 and are meant to provide a clear strategic direction for the next several years. To
      support the company's efforts, assemble a board of advisors. Recruit the smartest people you can
     find to advise you on each Key Thrust/Capability. It's always helpful to learn from those who have
 already been Where you're about to go.

 OPSP Column 4: Goals
       Moving to column 4, if you're going to get to your next camp, What are the #1 Priority and Key
       Initiatives for the company year — sometimes referred to as OKRs (Objectives and Key Results)?
     Addressing this starts with setting some very specific and expanded financial outcomes at the top
     of the column. Feel free to edit or add to the categories listed (e.g., some of you might not have
 significant inventory; tracking staff utilization instead might be more appropriate).
        Next, jump to the bottom of the column and determine THE Critical Number for the year: "the
  main thing that will be the main thing." Yes, we recognize that your metrics are all critical, but this
   Critical Number designation is specific to one metric each year. "The Priority" chapter will walk you
     through this Critical Number decision for the year and for the next 90 days (columns 4 and 5) and
                                                                                        131

---

Scaling Up

        GOALS (1 YR.)               explain how to set Critical Number targets: Super Green, Green, and Red. Think
  Yr Ending(What)                of them as giving your team the chance to earn a gold, silver, or bronze medal this
   Rovonuos                     coming year.
   Profit
   Mkt. Cap
   Gross Margin                   In general, you'll pick a Critical Number that will address either an opportunity
   Cash
  A/R Days
  Iny. Days                       or a challenge on the People/Balance Sheet side of the business (e.g., reduce em-
   AevEmp.
               Key Initiatives    ployee turnover, improve customer service scores, or dramatically reduce a credit
               1 Year Prionties
                                 line with the bank) or the Process/Profit & Loss side (e.g., improve gross margins,
                                   reduce production cycle time, or increase sales close ratios). And depending on
                                   which side you choose, you will want to pick a counterbalancing number from the
                                   other side to monitor (e.g., you want to improve relationships but don't want to
                                  give away the store, or you want to improve processes but not damage relationships
  Critical #: People or B/S     along the way).
   1                                  Last, move to the middle of the column and ask, "What are a handful of Key
  0
  Critical #: Process or P/L       Initiatives we must complete this year to achieve our financial outcomes and hit

   0                              our Critical Number?" Think of these initiatives as your corporate New Year's res-
                                olutions (Less is more) and plan to revise them each
                                time you close the books on your fiscal year — or as the        "Less is more."
 marketplace demands — while keeping an eye on the longer-term goals.
These are NOT a random set of priorities. Choose them to achieve the Critical Number. Again, jump
to "The Priority" chapter for more details.

 OPSP Column 5: Actions

 Column 5 mirrors column 4, only it details How you're going to contribute this                          ACTIONS (QTR)
                  quarter to accomplishing the one-year goals, driven by the Critical Number     Qtr         (How)
                     and Rocks for the next 90 days. Given this short time frame, management     Revenues
                                                                                                  Probt
 should have sufficient clarity and foresight to set financial outcomes precise-                  Mikt. Cap
                                                                                                 Gross Margin
                   ly (at the top of the column) and a Critical Number (at the bottom of the      Cash
                                                                                                 AR Days
                                                                                                  Irv. Day's
 column) that the company can achieve.                                                           Reov/Emp    Rocks
                                                                                                             Quartery Priontioas    Who
               KEY: The quarterly Critical Number represents a key step in achieving the                       5
                   annual Critical Number. For instance, Verne's brother-in-law worked for a
              company that set a specific cash target for the year. He then chose a Critical
                   Number in process improvement for the quarter. The goal was to reduce the
               dollars spent on parts to repair machines, therefore saving significant money
               for his division and contributing to the cash goal.                                      Critical #: People or B/8
                  Last, choose a handful of Rocks* — priorities that must be accomplished to
                achieve the quarterly financial outcomes and Critical Number. Again, less is            Critical #: Process or P/L
                more. Finally, place the initials of the person accountable for each Rock in
 the small corresponding "Who" box.

 132

---

                                                                                      The OPSP

Think of these Rocks as a series of three to five simultaneous 13-week sprints that provide focus and
direction to the rest of the organization.

*Rocks: This term honors the late Stephen R. Covey, author of The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People:
Powerful Lessons in Personal Change. He would demonstrate how, if you have a limited amount of time
  (a bucket) and put in a bunch of pebbles first (email, distractions, etc.), there's not much room for the
big important stuff (Rocks). But if you reverse the process — take care of the big things first — then
there's room for all of it. To see an excellent demonstration of Covey's rock analogy, go to YouTube
and search "Big Rocks in First" and watch the six-minute video with your team.

OPSP Column 6: Theme, Scoreboard Design, and Celebration/Reward

We will cover details for the Theme column, including some theme examples, in "The Priority"
chapter. To give you a quick overview, the idea is to build a fun and memorable theme around the
Critical Number from the Quarterly column. Specifically, starting at the top of the Theme column 6:
 1. Deadline: Normally the end of the current quarter (e.g., 31 Mar 2015).            THEME
                                                                                      (QTR/ANNUAL)
 2.Measurable Target: The quarterly Critical Number from the bottom             Deadine:
   of column 5.
 3.Theme Name: Brainstorm a fun and relevant title for the Quarterly                  Theme Name
   Theme. Current movie or song titles work well (Fast & Furious is always
   popular). Or try a play on a common phrase, like The City Bin Co.'s "Life    Scoreboard Design
                                                                                Descrbe andor ket you esign
   Begins at 40" (the goal: generate 40,000 euros more in monthly earnings).          in this space
 4Scoreboard Design: It can be a hand-drawn chart on the wall or a white-
   board, or a more elaborately printed or electronic version. You ultimately
   want something visible so everyone can see the score, which is updated
   daily or weekly.
 5. Celebration: The Quarterly Theme gives you a reason to host an event              Celebration
  to either celebrate the accomplishment of a big goal or commiserate.                                   :.
  It can be as simple as a barbecue in the parking lot, or it can be a signif-
  icant trip. It is even more fun if you pick a celebration destination that            Reward            8
  aligns with the theme (e.g., a "Fast & Furious" theme culminates in a
  go-carting experience).
 6.Reward: This might be prizes that align with the theme, or it can include a monetary incentive.
The key is giving your team finish lines and an opportunity to have some fun together.

OpSp Column 7: Your Accountability
Once the vision has been set, sit down with each individual or team in the company to establish
what they can do over the next quarter to help the organization succeed. This creates "line of sight,"
through which everyone is able to see how his or her daily actions link to the company's goals. In
                                                                                                   133

---

    Scaling Up

    some cases, doing a great job so that others are free to focus on a special    YOUR ACCOUNTABILITY
     initiative might be sufficient. Specifically, look at:                                AWn
                                                                                         You KPIs    Goal
      1. Your KPIs: Every employee or team should have an ongoing KPI or
       two that enables them to quantifiably answer the question, "Did we
       have a productive day or week?"
      2.Your Quarterly Priorities: In addition to an individual's ongoing         Your Quarterty Prionte
        work, what are a few priorities for the quarter that will raise his/her             7
        performance or drive a special project that aligns with the employ-
        ee's Critical Number and the #1 Priority of the company?
      3.Critical Number: What is the single most important quantifiable
        quarterly achievement for that person or team that will help the
        company achieve its vision?                                                Critical : People or B/S
     One of the keys to keeping people engaged is making a connection be-
     tween their day-to-day efforts and the goals and vision of the company
    If everyone can accomplish one thing in addition to his or her daily job
     that's a dozen improvements every quarter, or hundreds, depending on the
     number of employees.

     People and Process (Reputation and Productivity)

     To realize a vision, you need people doing stuff! Otherwise, the vision is just words on a piece of paper.
    These two main components — People and Process — are listed just above the main body of the OPSP.



     PEOPLE    PROCESS
(Relationships)    (Transactions/Activities)


    Employees    Recordkeeping
                 Make/Buy
    Customers

                 Shareholders    Sell




    134

---

                                                                          The OPSP

  On the left side, we have listed the three main groups of People involved in any business: employees,
    customers, and shareholders. The goal is to continually improve the company's Reputation with all
three as you balance the potentially competing demands between each group.
   On the right side, we have listed the three main Processes that drive any business: Make/Buy, Sell,
     and Recordkeeping. The goal is to continually improve the company's Productivity in all three as
you balance the potentially opposing demands between each process.
    The big challenge is balancing the competing demands among all six, like juggling spinning plates.
You want to keep all the people happy (Reputation), but you can't give away the store (Productivity).
    You want to continually improve your Processes todrive better results, but you don't want to reay
   upset any of the groups of People as you do so. Maintaining this balance between the demands of the
   People and Process sides of the business, as you scale up your Reputation and Productivity, requires
frequent feedback and metrics to keep you from dropping any plates.
     To complete the top portion of the OPSP, choose one or two KPIs you can track weekly to monitor
   the company's Reputation with all the stakeholders and the Productivity of the three main processes.
Here are some suggestions:
  Employees: Happiness and engagement scores (TINYpulse and Atlassian have simple systems
  for tracking these)
  Customers: Kept Promise Indicators and Net Promoter System scores
  Shareholders: Cash and company valuation
  Make/Buy: Speed of processes (Lean), costs, and quality measurements
  Sell: Close ratios, sales cycle, and revenue metrics
  Recordkeeping: Relevance, speed, and accuracy of data

 A Better Balance
    The Balanced Scorecard™", popularized by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton in their book
     by the same name, has been an industry-standard performance management tool for more than
    two decades. We align with Kaplan and Norton on the People side of the equation, emphasizing
    the need to balance the demands of employees, customers, and shareholders equally. Where we
   diverge is on the Process side. Kaplan and Norton lump all the processes into a single fourth
    category, whereas we break it into its three components: make/buy, sell, and recordkeeping.
   We believe this adds balance to the People side of the business. In the end, they balance four
 components, while we balance six.

  Many nonaccountants struggle with understanding the basic functions and structures of a balance
   sheet and an income (profit & loss) statement. Considering the People and Process sides of the
business from an accounting perspective often gives them a better grasp.

                                                                          135

---

Scaling Up

Let's look at the People side of the business. Track how the cash flows through the business with
 this equation:

  Customers:                 Cash from anyone who pays you
                                       minus (-)
  Employees:               Cash to anyone you pay ("employ"),
                such as traditional employees, contractors, suppliers, partners, etc.
                                       equals (=)
  Shareholders:           What is left to pay back investors, banks, sweat equity, etc.

 The balance sheet simply documents who owes you, whom you owe, and what is left over. It also
notes how much cash you have. The goal is to generate sufficient cash to fuel growth as the company
 faces the First Law of Business Dynamics: Growth sucks cash!

Now let's look at the Process side of the business. Track how the    "The First Law of
 business generates profit through these factors:                    Business Dynamics:
                                                                     Growth sucks cash!"
 Make/Buy:       The processes that generate expenses
  Sell:          The processes that generate revenue
  Recordkeeping: The processes for tracking all of these transactions

  "The Second Law of       The profit & loss (P&L) statement simply documents the revenue
                           and expenses and determines if there is a profit. The goal is to abide
  Business Dynamics:       by the Second Law of Business Dynamics: Buy low, sell high!
  Buy low, sell high!"     What's sad is that companies unknowingly violate this fundamental
                           every day. In "The Accounting" chapter, we'll discuss why the #2
 weakness of growing companies is the lack of sufficient financial data. You need data detailing the
 profitability of every customer, product, service, salesperson, location, etc., so you can see where the
 business is making a profit and where it is not.
In the end, the financial goals of the company are to collect cash from customers fast enough to
pay everyone it needs to employ and to reward the shareholders — and to sell things for more
 than they cost in order to generate a sufficient profit. Leaders must manage this balance between
 generating Cash and Profit, which mirrors the equilibrium between keeping the People happy and
 the Processes productive.





136

---

                                                                                   The OPSP

            Preparing for a Strategic Planning Session

   NOTE: You can download a detailed bonus chapter on how to prepare for and run a strategic
   planning offsite, including a sample of a completed OPSP, from scalingup.com.

  To complete the OPSP, JSJ Corporation finds that surveys are valuable tools. When it comes time
    to do a SWOT analysis, JSJ goes straight to its customers for feedback that influences its planning
     decisions. And to make the right calls about talent development, the company surveys its employees
for insight.
      CEO Jacobson believes that giving his team a chance to step back from the business and get rein-
   spired has been vital to its planning process. JSJ typically sends its leadership team and members of
     its business team to Fortune's Leadership Summit in the spring and its Growth Summit in the fall.
     JSJ's senior team arrives a day and a half early to do a deep dive into the OPSP and make updates.
 "It forces a discipline of getting away and taking the time to think deeply," says Jacobson.

 To mirror JSJ's routine, there are four main activities in preparing for a strategic planning session
  (quarterly or annual):
   1Managers at all levels gather feedback from employees and customers.
   2.Middle management completes a SWOT analysis and submits a Top 3 Priority list.
   3. Senior leadership completes a SWT analysis and submits a Top 3 Priority list.
   4.Everyone aims to keep learning and growing as a team.
    Nothing can emerge from the collective brain of the team that doesn't enter it first. JSJ sparks its
      team's thinking through the reading and executive education delivered in Gazelles' book club and
     participation in Fortune magazine's Summits. It also taps into the many decades of experience that
  company employees have accumulated.

 Employee and Customer Feedback

 The first preparatory activity is to send out a short Start/Stop/Keep survey to all the employees:
   1. What do you think [company name] should start doing?
  2. What do you think [company name] should stop doing?
   3.What do you think [company name] should keep doing?
These are broad enough to solicit responses ranging from "We need a new microwave in the break
room" to "We need to start looking at robotics technology.

 Ask the same three questions of your customers. It could be a random sample if you have thousands
   of retail customers; or it might be more appropriate to have account managers query business-to-busi-
     ness customers face-to-face or over the phone. Use your best judgment, but be sure to incorporate
customer feedback into the process.
                                                                                             137

---

 Scaling Up

 The weekly routine of collecting and reviewing ongoing feedback from customers and employees
 will also feed into the decisions made during the planning process. We will outline more details of
 these ongoing routines in "The Data" chapter.

 SWT and SWOT
 We've observed for decades how market-leading firms eventually fall behind start-ups because they
 are blinded by their current reality. This is what Harvard Business School professor Clayton M.
 Christensen labeled the "innovator's dilemma" (detailed in his book by the same name).
 So why do leaders miss seeing sweeping global trends that are about to broadside them? We put a
big part of the blame on the standard SWOT analysis. It's time to update this methodology.

 Inside/Industry Myopia

 Almost by definition, the SWOT process drives leaders to look inward at both their company and
 industry challenges, creating what we term "inside/industry myopia." The traditional SWOT analysis,
 while helping executives see the forest and the trees, tends to lead them to forget that there's a world
 outside the forest. The SWOT, with this introspective focus, isn't the right tool to spot the trends
 in other industries and distant markets that CEOs must factor into their plans.
 We don't want to throw away the SWOT. It still has its place in the strategic planning process. It's an
 excellent tool for gathering ideas and input from middle managers, who are more internally focused
 and closer to the day-to-day operations of an organization.

 SWT Instead                                                       Strategy: Strengths,                                  na3 (SWD.Workshoe  Gazelles

 For senior leaders, we propose replacing the SWOT with the        Trends
 SWT: an updated approach that identifies inherent Strengths
 and Weaknesses within their firms while exploring broader ex-
 ternal Trends beyond their own industry or geography.
As we've mentioned several times, the strategic planning pro-      Strengths/Core Competencles                           Weaknesses
cess comprises two distinct activities: strategic thinking and     What are the innerort srangths of the organzaton tht  What are the irenant w
                                                                   have teen the source of your success?
 execution planning. Strategic thinking is coming up with a few
 big-picture ideas. Execution planning is figuring out how to
 make them happen.

 The traditional SWOT is a great tool for execution planning —
 the focus of middle management — resulting in a laundry list of
 accolades and fixes. However, for the senior team, the SWOT
 can be a trap. It tends to pull executives down into operational  Cv4G
 138

---

                                                                               The OPSP

issues, distracting them from the much bigger forces around the globe that can take the company by
surprise if it is not prepared.
 Therefore, to anchor strategic thinking, senior leaders need to complete the SWT. It will help them
  face the brutal facts about the company's inherent strengths and weaknesses, and the global trends
threatening to wash over their industry.
Let's look at the components of the SWT.

Trends
In addition to sizing up the immediate opportunities and threats that the SWOT tends to surface,
the senior team needs to rise above all of this. Leaders should look at major trends, such as signif-
   icant changes in technology, distribution, product innovation, markets, and consumer and social
developments around the world that might shake up not only the business but the entire industry.
 Forget about the competitor down the street. Is there a company on the other side of the globe that
  might put you out of business? Is there a new technology coming onto the start-up scene that could
   lead to an overnight change in the way all companies must do business? How is robotics changing
 the very nature of work? These are the kinds of questions the strategic thinking team must explore.
  Choose four to six trends most likely to shake up your industry and business, and list them on the
  bottom of the OPSP. Recalling Jim Collins' dual dynamic, mentioned earlier, these trends are meant
to anchor the "stimulate progress" right side of the OPSP.

Inherent Strengths and Weaknesses

Like an individual, an organization has innate strengths and weaknesses. Coping with them is less
about changing them and more about playing the hand the organization was dealt.

 For instance, Verne led the five-year strategic planning process for Benjamin Franklin International
  School (BFIS), which his children attend. It will always lack a large corporate or government base
  from which to draw funds. Students are situated in Barcelona vs. Madrid, an inherent weakness not
easily changed by the school.
In turn, an inherent strength for the school is its fashionable location. This has continually driven
 enrollment from the families of Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, helping BFIS thrive during one of the
worst economic periods in Spain's history.
  Like the trends, this handful of inherent strengths (core competencies) and weaknesses needs to be
    determined and listed on the bottom of the OPSP. Given their relative permanence, they anchor
the "preserve the core" side of the OPSP, on the left.

                                                                               139

---

Scaling Up

Mining All Levels

In summary, to feed the strategic planning process properly, the key is using different techniques
to mine ideas from all levels of the organization. With frontline employees and customers, ask the
Start/Stop/Keep questions. With middle management, require a standard SWOT and inquire about
their top three priorities for the quarter or year.
And demand that the senior team go deeper and broader using the SWT. Knowing what trends are
going to shake up your industry — and having a plan for dealing with them — will help you stay
ahead of the competition, and sniff out new rivals who want to take over your turf while you can stil
do something about it. At Amazon, one of the questions founder Jeff Bezos asks his team each week
is what competitors have entered their market in the last seven days!
Again, go to scalingup.com to download a more comprehensive, step-by-step guide for preparing and
running a strategic planning process, along with a sample OPSP










140

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

  SCALING UP
EXECUTION

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

 THE EXECUTION INTRODUCTION

               KEY QUESTION: Are all processes running without drama and driving industry-leading
 profitability?
       In the largest investment in an e-commerce company in Canadian history, Coastal.com, a Vancouver-based
          eyewear company, was purchased in 2014 by Essilor International, one of the world's largest lens
            manufacturers, for CAD$430 million. Roger Hardy, Coastal.com's founder and CEO, credits the
disciplined execution of the Rockefeller Habits with these stellar results.

        Case in point: Some German industrialists sat in on Coastal.com's daily executive team huddle while
          the company's leaders stood up and reported on their Critical Numbers. The executives discussed
         quickly their key opportunities, issues, highlights, problems, and threats. "They were blown away
 with our operational efficiencies and knowledge of the business," Hardy noted.

             Hardy's team also introduced the Net Promoter System (NPS) to measure how likely customers
        were to recommend the business to others and to single out a few (from over 2 million) who indicated
        they were not raving fans, so the senior team could call them. These weekly conversations with cus-
        tomers, debriefed at the weekly huddle, gave Hardy and his leadership team the kind of gut feel for
the market that drives ongoing improvements. One change, which we'll share in "The Data" chapter,
          caused revenue to jump 60% in one market. More recently, Coastal.com tapped into the innovative
        ideas of its employees in its own Shark Tank type of competition. Implementing those ideas generated
another 15% lift for Coastal.com's revenue in 2013.

       Coastal.com excels at execution precisely because it listens to customers and employees; has a meeting
         rhythm to discuss and implement quickly what's being learned; and relies on a process for setting
        priorities based on all this input. This excellence in execution continues to wow customers, engage
employees, and deliver stunning financial results for the shareholders.
           At the end of this Introduction is the Rockefeller Habits Checklist™. Take a few minutes to go
         through it. Don't worry if you don't have many items checked. Neither did Hardy's executives when
        they attended their first Rockefeller Habits workshop. "It gave me a blueprint on how to run a team
in a successful way and is a key part of why we have achieved $200 million in sales while keeping
 everyone aligned and heading in the same direction," says Hardy.

      Hardy advises CEOs to review the Checklist every three months. "You're not going to get it perfect every
 quarter," he says. "It's a work in progress. It forces you, though, to be objective and to realize there are blind
    spots. Like a pilot taking off, you don't want to forget to lift the landing gear. It may be the things you
      take for granted that can hurt you the most. A Checklist is a good way of reminding you what's missing.'

        Jim Collins and Morten T. Hansen, in their book Great by Choice: Uncertainty, Chaos, and Luck — Why
       Some Thrive Despite Them All, note: "Greatness is not a function of circumstance. Greatness, it turns
       out, is largely a matter of conscious choice, and discipline." We couldn't agree more, and hope you'l
consciously choose to implement the 10 Rockefeller Habits detailed in this section.
                                                                                   145

---

Scaling Up

                         Section Overview

This section is structured around the 10 Rockefeller Habits, divided into three disciplines (routines)
fundamental to execution:
1. Priorities: Less is more in driving focus and alignment.
2. Data: Qualitative and quantitative feedback provides clarity and foresight.
3. Meeting Rhythm: Give yourself the time to make better/faster decisions.
The first chapter, The Priority, highlights Rockefeller Habits #1 and #2, emphasizing the importance
of having a "healthy team" that is able to face the brutal facts and support the kind of constructive
debate necessary to set a main priority that everyone can support. This chapter also reviews important
routines centered around Rockefeller Habits #4, #7, and #8 that were covered in earlier chapters.

The second chapter, The Data, highlights Rockefeller Habits #5, #6, #9, and #10, and the importance
of gathering both quantitative and qualitative data to properly fuel decision-making. It's particularly
critical for the senior leadership team and middle managers to engage in weekly conversations with
customers and employees (and to shop competitors).
The third chapter, The Meeting Rhythm, highlights Rockefeller Habit #3 — the importance of set-
ting a routine of daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual meetings to address the communication
challenges that exist whenever you get a group of people together. These structured meetings also
create the space and time for teams to debate and make the important decisions driving the scaling
up of the organization.
Two one-page Execution tools will be covered in this section:
1. Rockefeller Habits Checklist™": 10 routines for driving relentless repeatability
in your execution
2. Who, What, When (WWW): Quick summary of actions and accountabilities —
the only "notes" you need to keep from a meeting of an hour or longer

A special thank-you to Kevin Lawrence, Gazelles International Certified Coach partner in Vancouver, for
contributing to this "Execution" section and serving as an early collaborator on the book.










146

---

Execution: Rockefeller Habits Checklist™                                                            Gazelles
                                                                                                    GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES

1. The executive team is healthy and aligned.
  Team members understand each other's differences, priorities. and styles.
  The team meets frequently (weekly is best) for strategic thinking.
  The team participates in ongoing executive education (monthly recommended).
D The team is able to engage in constructive debates and all members feel comfortable participating
2. Everyone is aligned with the #1 thing that needs to be accomplished this quarter to move the company forward
 The Critical Number is identified to move the company ahead this quarter.
  3-5 Priorities (Rocks) that support the Critical Number are identified and ranked for the quarter.
  A Quarterly Theme and Celebration/Reward are announced to all employees that bring the Critical Number to life
 Quarterly Theme/Critical Number posted throughout the company and employees are aware of the progress each week.
3. Communication rhythm is established and information moves through organization accurately and quickly.
All employees are in a daily huddle that lasts less than 15 minutes.
All teams have a weekly meeting.
The executive and middle managers meet for a day of learning, resolving big issues, and DNA transfer each month
Quarterly and annually, the executive and middle managers meet offsite to work on the 4 Decisions.
4. Every facet of the organization has a person assigned with accountability for ensuring goals are met.
  The Function Accountability Chart (FACe) is completed (right people, doing the right things, right).
  Financial statements have a person assigned to each line item.
  Each of the 4-9 processes on the Process Accountability Chart (PACe) has someone that is accountable for them.
  Each 3-5 year Key Thrust/Capability has a corresponding expert on the Advisory Board if internal expertise doesn't exist
5. Ongoing employee input is collected to identify obstacles and opportunities.
  All executives (and middle managers) have a Start/Stop/Keep conversation with at least one employee weekly
  The insights from employee conversations are shared at the weekly executive team meeting.
  Employee input about obstacles and opportunities is being collected weekly.
 A mid-management team is responsible for the process of closing the loop on all obstacles and opportunities.
6. Reporting and analysis of customer feedback data is as frequent and accurate as financial data.
All executives (and middle managers) have a 4Q conversation with at least one end user weekly
  The insights from customer conversations are shared at the weekly executive team meeting.
 All employees are involved in collecting customer data.
 A mid-management team is responsible for the process of closing the loop on all customer feedback.
7. Core Values and Purpose are "alive" in the organization.
  Core Values are discovered, Purpose is articulated, and both are known by all employees.
  All executives and middle managers refer back to the Core Values and Purpose when giving praise or reprimands.
  HR processes and activities align with the Core Values and Purpose (hiring, orientation, appraisal, recognition, etc.).
  Actions are identified and implemented each quarter to strengthen the Core Values and Purpose in the organization.
8. Employees can articulate the following key components of the company's strategy accurately.
  Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG) - Progress is tracked and visible.
  Core Customer(s) - Their profile in 25 words or less.
  3 Brand Promises - And the corresponding Brand Promise KPls reported on weekly.
  Elevator Pitch - A compelling response to the question "What does your company do?"
9. All employees can answer quantitatively whether they had a good day or week (Column 7 of the One-Page Strategic Plan)
0 1 or 2 Key Performance Indicators (KPls) are reported on weekly for each role/person.
  Each employee has 1 Critical Number that aligns with the company's Critical Number for the quarter (clear line of sight).
  Each individual/team has 3-5 Quarterly Priorities/Rocks that align with those of the company.
All executives and middle managers have a coach (or peer coach) holding them accountable to behavior changes.
10. The company's plans and performance are visible to everyone.
  A "situation room" is established for weekly meetings (physical or virtual).
  Core Values, Purpose and Priorities are posted throughout the company.
  Scoreboards are up everywhere displaying current progress on KPls and Critical Numbers.
  There is a system in place for tracking and managing the cascading Priorities and KPls.



Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

Execution: Who •What • When (WWW)    Gazelles
                                     GROWInG LEADERS-GROWinG COMPANIES


Who    What    When










Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

  THE PRIORITY
  Focus, Finish Lines, and Fun



          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: "The main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing," noted the late
    Stephen R. Covey, author of The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in Personal
Change. Individuals or organizations with too many priorities have no priorities and risk spinning their wheels
 and accomplishing nothing of significance. In turn, laser-focusing everyone on a single priority — today, this
  week, this quarter, this year, and the next decade — creates clarity and power throughout the organization.
    In this chapter, we'll press hard for you and your company to stay focused. We'll show you how to wrap a
   memorable theme around your priority; achieve it — or at least make substantial progress toward it — by a
                               sue ate;ndhos ceran w rewr t ro the eq nh  n  pup
    the energy and engagement of the team members as they achieve something significant together.


     Iene Browne didn't know how to drive a garbage truck when he started a waste collection
     T
     this is one of the keys to success in his business.

     By staying out of his trucks and focusing on steering the company instead, he has scaled the profitable
          business to $25 million in annual revenue and 120 employees in 2014, up from 80 in 2013. The City
          Bin Co. is now working toward a Big Hairy Audacious Goal™ of serving 1 million customers by 2020.
    This is its long-term "main thing.'
        In 2011, it became clear to CEO Mark Zuckerberg that "Facebook's first priority needed to be figuring
     out a wireless strategy," noted a 2013 article in Fortune magazine. Jessi Hempel, senior writer, explained:
           "He was maniacal about it. In December 2011 he reorganized the company to embed mobile engineers
          in all product teams. In June 2012 he began Facebook's annual all-hands meeting by explaining that
           the company's most pressing priority was to become a mobile company." Every acquisition, hiring
          decision, and software development project was focused on one thing for the next 18 months: to go
             mobile. And in April of 2013, Facebook did. It achieved mobile ad revenue that exceeded all
         expectations in the next six months, reaching 50% of total revenue in the fourth quarter of 2013. It
    was an amazing pivot that saved the company. This was Facebook's medium-term "main thing."

            Toward the end of 2010, Ignite Social Media President Jim Tobin had a "rock in his shoe." His
           28-member team wasn't using its newly installed project-management system. With a month left in
          the year, he wrote on a whiteboard in the break room, "Late: 241; Unassigned: 728" and dated each
         metric "12/1." After sending out a short email to his team focusing everyone on getting both metrics
         to zero by 12/31, he was blown away to find that within 24 hours, late tasks had dropped by 25%, to

                                                                                              149

---

Scaling Up

                                      193, and unassigned tasks by over half, to 353. By the end of the
   241433                               month, both were at zero. The team was now ready for 2011. This
 ATE:                                  was the short-term "main thing" at Ignite, which has since grown
                   to 110 employees.
UnnSsED: 121  122  Decades ago, Charles Schwab, CEO of Bethlehem Steel, asked
              353                             management consultant Ivy Lee to show him how to get more
                                         done. As the famous story goes, Lee asked Schwab to write down
                   and prioritize his six most important tasks to complete the next
       business day. Then he instructed Schwab to start on item #1 the next day and not move on to item
      #2 until item #1 was completed. "Don't be concerned if you've only finished two or three, or even
     one, by quitting time. You'll be working on the most important ones, and the others can wait." Lee
    encouraged Schwab to share this approach with his executives, judge the value, and "send me a check
       for whatever you think it's worth." Two weeks later, Lee received a check for $25,000 — a king's
        ransom in those days — and an accompanying note in which Schwab said it was the most profitable
lesson he'd ever learned. This priority list was Schwab's daily "main thing."
As the above examples demonstrate, priority-setting is as applicable today as it was 100 years ago, and
as critical in the short run as in the long term. As Confucius said, "He who chases two rabbits catches
neither." The key is sequencing a series of #1 priorities that keep everyone focused and heading in
the same general direction together.
        Throughout the book, we have emphasized setting priorities (that includes deciding which of the
        4 Decisions to focus on first and which box on the FACe chart needs to be updated next). On the
One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP), there is a progression of #1 priorities:
 1. Core Purpose: the one word/idea/speech driving the business
 2. BHAG: the one 10- to 25-year goal for the company
 3. Profit per X: the one overarching KPI representing the core economic engine of the enterprise
 4.Brand Promise: the one most important measurable promise (of three) representing the brand
 5. The Critical Number: the one key driver for the year and the quarter
    And in chapter on "The Meeting Rhythm," we'll continue this focus on priorities, imploring the team
  to pick one key topic to discuss/solve at the weekly meeting and one big issue/opportunity to address
   at the monthly management meeting. Again, it's just a matter of sequencing these initiatives so they
align and build upon each other. This way, you can tackle the hundreds of decisions and activities that
           need to be addressed without overwhelming and defocusing the team. As the well-known analogy
suggests, you can only eat an elephant one bite at a time. The same is true with scaling up a business.

              Rockefeller Habits Checklist™
      Throughout this "Execution" section, we'll cover the 10 routines listed on the Rockefeller Habits
     Checklist™". Flip back to "The Execution: Introduction" and take a few minutes to review the list,

150

---

                                                                    The Priority

 placing a checkmark next to each routine you feel is present (even if not perfect) in your organization.
 Or download a copy of the Rockefeller Habits Checklist™ at scalingup.com and mark it up, if you prefer.
 Managers who've completed the checklist often ask us two questions:
 1.How did we survive/thrive for all these years and yet have nothing checked off on the list?
 2. Are the habits in any kind of order?

    Responding to the first question, we remind execu-  Execution: Rockefeller Habits Checklist    Gazelles
 tive teams that this is an execution checklist. It's not
   necessary to implement any of these habits to build
  a long-lasting organization. It just means you've been
     leaving massive amounts of money and time on the
  table. And if you have a killer strategy and/or heroic
  people willing to work 18-hour days, eight days a week
   these will make up for the messes created by sloppy
 execution and lack of discipline

    To answer the second question, you can't implement
 any of what we've taught in this book unless Rockefeller
Habit #1 — "The executive team is healthy and aligned"
   — exists. The order in which you implement the oth-
  er habits doesn't matter. Choose just one or two each
 quarter, based on what will give you the most immediate
   benefit, as you would with the rest of our crossword
 puzzle-like tools. Over 24 to 36 months, you'll have
moved through all 10 habits.

 Rockefeller Habit #1 - Healthy Team

 1. The executive team is healthy and aligned.
 Team members understand each other's differences, priorities, and styles.
 The team meets frequently (weekly is best) for strategic thinking.
 The team participates in ongoing executive education (monthly recommended).
 The team is able to engage in constructive debates and all members feel comfortable participating.

Patrick M. Lencioni's best-selling book The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership Fable defines
the unhealthy situations that can derail your leadership team: an absence of trust, fear of conflict
lack of commitment, avoidance of accountability, and inattention to results. If one or more of these
afflictions exist, address it before you tackle any other aspect of execution. We strongly suggest
purchasing Lencioni's affordable "Team Kit." Take your leadership team through his assessment and
training process to strengthen the levels of trust, healthy debate, commitment, accountability, and
results. It's a great tune-up for even healthy teams. At a minimum, require all leaders and managers
to read his book once a year. It's a quick read, and doing a refresher can prevent new problems from
arising within the team as you scale up.
                                                                                                   151

---

Scaling Up

Many of the Rockefeller Habits reinforce routines that keep the team healthy, like taking a few
minutes to share personal and professional good news at the start of a weekly or monthly meeting
(discussed in "The Meeting Rhythm" chapter). Other ways to help the team build trust:
Personality and leadership style assessments, which help team members appreciate each
   other's differences
Meal and social time during offsite planning sessions                       "The #1 habit is the most
   and monthly management meetings                                          important and first."
Shared learning experiences

Once the team is healthy, then it is ready to tackle the tough work of setting priorities successfully.

          Rockefeller Habit #2- The #1 Priority

2. Everyone is aligned with the #1 thing that needs to be accomplished this quarter to move the company forward.
   The Critical Number is identified to move the company ahead this quarter.
   3-5 Priorities (Rocks) that support the Critical Number are identified and ranked for the quarter.
   A Quarterly Theme and Celebration/Reward are announced to all employees that bring the Critical Number to life.
   Quarterly Theme/Critical Number posted throughout the company and employees are aware of the progress each week.

To simplify our methodology, there are two main vision decisions: the BHAG® (Everest) and the
                   measurable next step (one with a 90-day to one-year focus). Everything else in between is just a
WAG — a wild-ankle guess. The BHAG, derived from your strategy, is the main long-term priority
anchoring the strategic thinking in the vision. The quarterly or annual Critical Number is the main
short-term priority anchoring the execution planning side.
Rockefeller Habit #2 starts with identifying this Critical Number, introduced and popularized through
               Jack Stack's classic book The Great Game of Business: The Only Sensible Way to Run a Company. Though
all your metrics are critical, reserve the term "Critical Number" for your measurable #1 priority, even
when other metrics are nearly as important.
To derive the one Critical Number, imagine the hundreds of important things you need to accomplish
lined up like dominoes. Find the lead domino: the one initiative that, when pursued, makes it easier
to accomplish everything else. Or identify the constraint — the choke point or bottleneck — and
address it first. For more on how to choose this "critical" constraint, read my favorite biz book of all
time titled The Goal by the late Eli Goldratt. Scaling up is all about eliminating constraints — in
the business and for customers.
At ProService Hawaii, a human resources firm based in Honolulu, President Ben Godsey determined
that in the 2014 fiscal year, his Critical Number was getting 600 referrals. This was a major stretch
goal. The company, which has $120 million in annual sales, had previously averaged fewer than 200
referrals a year, despite its focus on developing a great service culture and innovative products —
indicated by a Net Promoter Score (NPS) consistently above 70% (on par with Apple).
After Godsey's team talked about how great it would be to get more referrals from satisfied clients, the
company created an annual theme around the plan. It set that stretch goal: getting 600 leads from clients
152

---

                                                                                 The Priority

in 12 months, three times more than it had ever achieved. And sure enough, the company accomplished
this with a couple of weeks to spare— and the entire team celebrated with a trip to Waikoloa Beach.
  In addition to tripling leads, this single focused and measurable priority helped to knock over a bunch
       of other dominoes. "We've now made referrals, by far, the biggest driver of our growth — which
   shows quality and value to clients — through achieving a goal we thought was pretty far-fetched," says
      Godsey. "More important, the focus on referrals has become embedded in our culture, reinforcing
     our service ethic." Clients and staff understand that as the company grows, getting more referrals
    helps the firm invest in improving its services and products, and brings new projects that are good
 for staff development. "We call that the virtuous cycle of growth," Godsey says.
     So, what is the most important and measurable choke point you need to fix/control in your business
    this coming year? Figure it out. Then give your team a chance to win gold, silver, or bronze rewards
       (Super Green, Green, or Red at the bottom of column 4 of the OPSP). ProService Hawaii normally
   has a three-tiered set of goals in its themes. However, in upping its game in lead generation, "we did
       not have Red and Green goals this time," notes Godsey. "We set one high bar [Super Green]; the
      Critical Number of hitting 600 referrals. It was like going to the moon and back: Either we were
going to do it, bya working together toward this singular goal [like Apollo 13], or die trying."
     Godsey's team is experienced in using themes and therefore was ready for this all-or-nothing chal-
     lenge. For those new to this routine, give your team some wiggle room in the beginning by setting
      a three-tiered target. Using the ProService example, we might recommend setting 200 leads as the
     minimum target (Red), with the reward being a party in the company's parking lot; 400 leads as the
    goal (Green), with the reward a local beach party; and 600 leads as the stretch goal (Super Green),
 with a company trip to Waikoloa Beach.

 Quarterly Themes
 The Quarterly Theme is a fun motif you can use in your internal marketing to rally everyone around
 achieving your Critical Number.
  NOTE: Especially for those new to the process, we encourage teams to start with a few initial themes that
  last no longer than a quarter. It takes several quarters to master choosing and setting Critical Numbers.
  Gene Browne thought he had tapped into the ideas covered in Mastering the Rockefeller Habits as he
      grew The City Bin Co., but with Ireland's economy hit hard by the global economic crisis, he de-
   cided he needed to dig deeper into the habits in 2009. "Ireland was in a deep recession," he recalls.
 I thought we needed to do something new. We needed to get out of the quagmire."
    That year, he flew his leadership team to Orlando, Florida, for a two-day "Mastering the Rockefeller
     Habits" workshop. There, he realized that he hadn't been focusing enough on using Quarterly Themes
            to align his company's employees as their numbers grew. "It was stuff we thought we were doing,
  but weren't, really," Browne says.

                                                                                                153

---

Scaling Up

     When Browne and his team returned to Ireland, they decided to put the Quarterly Themes front and
   center. Every quarter, they ask themselves: What is the single most important thing going on in the
    business in the next 90 days that we want everyone to be aligned on? Then they assign a "Champion"
   to prepare a presentation, using guidelines from a sheet of best practices for Quarterly Themes that
    the company outlined. A designer in the software division creates a humorous visual theme to align
 everyone in the company around it. The Champion who selects the theme can be any employee, but
Browne and his managing director have final approval.

      The presentation is shared in an hourly meeting with all of The City Bin Co.'s employees each
      quarter. Within each theme, the company lists smaller "Rocks" (column 5 of the OPSP) that need
 to be addressed in order to achieve the company's big goal for the next 13 weeks, helping to focus
    everyone on execution. Though employees do not discuss the themes during daily huddles, which are
   focused on daily operations, they devote 30 minutes at weekly meetings to addressing progress toward
    the Quarterly Theme. Particular employees are asked to take ownership of the Rocks in their areas
     of responsibility, and the company's managing director and finance manager track progress toward
meeting the goals, using key metrics. "It transformed the company," Browne says.

Here are several examples of The City Bin Co.'s Quarterly Themes:

Saving Mrs. Ryan

   With price pressure in his industry especially high, one of the themes that Browne introduced in the
first quarter of 2014 was "Saving Mrs. Ryan." Borrowing from the military theme of the movie Saving
      Private Ryan, the 90-day campaign focused on attracting 10,000 individual new customers, home-
      makers now identified as "Mrs. Ryan" (the company's core "Who"). The cover of the presentation
   was illustrated with the silhouette of a soldier, flanked by the company's trash cans. "Competitors'
       contracts were coming up for renewal, and we wanted to bring onboard 10,000 new Mrs. Ryans,"
    says Browne. "We wanted to save these Mrs. Ryans from the 'Soviet era' service of a rival firm, so
 we sent a door-to-door 'assault' team to rescue them."

     Giant posters in the company's main office and depot reminded employees of each quarter's theme.
 In this case, above office workers' cubicles were "Saving Mrs. Ryan" posters, designed to look like the
     movie poster from the Tom Hanks film. A board in the company's main office tracked the number of
   contracts being signed, providing daily progress reports to the entire company. At weekly meetings,
     there were more detailed updates, in which the managing director presented a slide — in military
   green, with a stencil font similar to the one used by the US Army — showing progress in meeting the
     subsidiary goals, or rocks. The City Bin Co. provided bonuses to particular employees who moved
     the needle toward the goal each month, to keep the momentum going. "Instead of waiting until the
 end, this is better," says Browne.

     To motivate its team to exceed its goals, The City Bin Co. sometimes picks a Super Green bench-
    mark that is above and beyond its target for a given theme. For the "Saving Mrs. Ryan" theme, the
company selected a Super Green target of saving 12,000 Mrs. Ryans.

154

---

                                                                                    The Priority

Life Begins at 40

The City Bin Co.'s themes have varied along with the constraints     LIFE BEGINS AT.
confronting the company each quarter. To raise profitability
while recovering from the recession, the company ran the "Life
Begins at 40" campaign from August to October 2011, with an
image of a Las Vegas slot machine hitting the jackpot gracing
the guidebook's cover. The idea was to increase the company's        HIT THE BIG FOUR-O
monthly earnings by 40,000 euros a month, either through an-         & WIN!
nual savings or recurring revenue. Employees were invited to         the city bin c:
submit ideas to raise cash or slash the budget.
 The theme was lighthearted, but Browne knew it was necessary for the long-term survival of the com-
pany. "The economy had contracted so much that a lot of companies in Ireland were closing down,"
says Browne. "'Life Begins at 40' was saying that if we can get to this magic figure, it'll ensure that
we can ride through this economic storm." The company managed to achieve its goal to fuel growth.
 180 to One
 Another lighthearted, betting-oriented theme, "180 to One," focused on having each of Browne's 60
employees spend one day a month job-sharing during the first quarter of 2012 (60 employees x 3
job-sharing days = 180), to improve customer service throughout The City Bin Co. "We wanted to
                get people thinking outside of their own department and get an
                 appreciation of what the other departments do," says Browne.
               That meant having the accounts people work in the call centers,
      180 TO    asking the customer center workers to ride around in the com-
      ONE      pany's garbage trucks, and enlisting the truck drivers to answer
                 the phones at the customer center.

                 Customer service and staff cohesiveness improved tangibly. A
                  truck driver now knew what types of complaints would come
              into the call center if a bin was not picked up. "We've seen a big
 change in relation to the culture," says Browne. "If you ask people what the one thing The City Bin
Co. is about, they will say, 'Customer service.'" At the end of the quarter, the company celebrated
beating the odds and accomplishing its goal by inviting its team to the dog races.
Bin it
 Some themes have focused on improving efficiency. One, adopted in the second quarter of 2012, was
 called "Bin it." It asked employees to submit index cards listing wasteful practices and unnecessary
 tasks they wanted to stop doing — anything that was depleting time, money, energy, or space without
a valuable result. "People like me, in senior management, ask people to do things and load them on,"
 says Browne. "We never take away stuff." Often, employees may hesitate to speak up or to question
a manager about why they're doing something, even if it's obvious to them that it isn't necessary.

                                                                                       155

---

  Scaling Up

  Browne had one reminder of how much time could be wasted
  this way after he asked a team member to keep track of customer                                     2
  signups on a spreadsheet that he intended to monitor for three      Binit
  months during a marketing campaign. Nearly three years later, in
  a casual conversation, the employee mentioned that she was still    if it's wasting time, energy,
  keeping the spreadsheet.                                            money or space

  "You're still doing that?" Browne asked. "I haven't looked at it in
  two and a half years."

  To inspire employees to clear the decks of projects like this and focus on what really matters, the "Bin
  it" campaign awarded prizes — ranging from tickets to the cinema to a weekend break — to those
  who submitted items that were approved to be "binned." As with its other Quarterly Themes, The
  City Bin Co. introduced this one with a launch party; it celebrated with a barbecue upon meeting
  its goals. And lest employees forget about the theme, floor-to-ceiling red posters at the company's
  offices reminded them to "Bin it.'

  "We binned more than 150 activities over that quarter, many of which affected several individuals,
 so the total impact was huge," says Browne. "It also brought a new phrase and philosophy to the
 company culture."
  Bin's Health                                                        THE INCREDIBLE CUSTOMER SERVICE MACHINE

 After the company invested heavily in a marketing campaign, it       TBin'shH
      introduced the "Bin's Health" theme for May through July 2013.  LOSE THE POUNDS!    BRETE B
 The presentation of the theme was a play on the magazine Men's       GETBACK                TH
        Health - complete with David Beckham on the cover, with an    IN SHAPE                     WAY?
                                                                      SEE RESULTS IN JUST 90 DAYS!     JOB
  image of The City Bin Co.'s logo superimposed on his chest. The     CROTAN MA                         ONE!
       company had been splurging on marketing spending as it made
       a major move into a new market that helped grow its customer   STOP.&
     base 250%. "However, at a certain point, there's no more bang to                                 2
     your buck" says Browne — and it was time to get lean again. The
    presentation outlined the company's goals for cutting spending by
   set percentages in salaries, transportation, advertising and design,
 legal and professional services, vehicle hires, and landfill costs.  SPEND IT LIKE YOU WOULD YOUR OWN

   In this case, The City Bin Co. didn't meet its goals, but it made progress toward them. "It was very
    clear some time into it that we were probably a bit too aggressive on our goal," Browne says. While
the company held its customary parties to kick off the theme and to celebrate the end of the 13 weeks
it did not offer any awards, as it did when the team met goals in other quarters.
       NOTE: The City Bin Co. alternates between a Critical Number and Quarterly Theme that are focused
   on improving the People side of the business ("180 to One," "Saving Mrs. Ryan") and the Process side
   of the business ("Life Begins at 40," "Bin it," "Bin's Health"). It's important to find the same kind of
   balance as you sequence your #1 priorities.

156

---

                                                                                 The Priority

To Reward or Not To Reward
What if in the middle of a Quarterly Theme or an annual one, you feel the team is going to miss the
Critical Number, maybe substantially? Do you adjust midstream? Do you lower the target?
If the organization misses the mark, you have three options:
 Repeat the Critical Number in the next quarter if it's still crucial that the organization
   achieve the target. We've seen this when a quality or a customer service score needs to
   be reached.
  2.Move on to another Critical Number if you sense that enough momentum was created with
    the previous target to keep the organization trending in the right direction.
  Do a root-cause analysis to uncover the reasons your organization didn't achieve your Critical
    Number. Choose one of those reasons to fix in the next quarter. For instance, The City Bin
    Co.'s "180 to One" theme addressed an organizational health issue. Browne felt team mem-
    bers needed to step back and gain more empathy for each other's situations so they would be
    ready to work as one to achieve the next target.
 Like the river making its way from Everest to the ocean, your organization will have to constantly
        navigate obstacles and take a step back (or pause) every once in a while. One reason we encourage
        organizations new to this process to start out with Quarterly Themes, rather than annual ones, is
     that it isn't uncommon for teams to fall short of their goals in the beginning. Don't change the goals.
    It can be inspiring to stick with a target to see if the team can pull out a victory in the last few days.
       At the same time, no one's paycheck should suffer because the senior team chose an overly aggressive
       goal or one that the team was not prepared to achieve. Pick celebrations and rewards that are mostly
for fun.
          And having three potential targets — Super Green, Green, and Red — ups the odds that the team
       will earn a medal. Even if you don't hit the minimum goal, convene the team for an event to announce
         the results. One company promised a barbecue at which management would cook if the team achieved
  certain employee-retention goals. The higher the target, the better the menu. If the team hit 75%
          retention (Red), employees would dine on hot dogs and hamburgers. If they reached 80% (Green),
          management would serve chicken and ribs. The company promised steak if the business held on to
          85% of employees (Super Green). When the team missed even the minimum, management instead
 hosted a soup kitchen.
       Last, as the company matures in the use of quarterly and annual themes, you can dial up the rewards.
          At Jack Stack's SRC Holdings Corporation, a group of companies with revenue totaling over half
        a billion dollars, roughly 15% of employees' compensation is tied the achievement of the Critical
          Number. Again, we strongly encourage you to read Stack's book The Great Game of Business, and
       have a team travel to Springfield, Missouri, to attend his two-day "Get in the Game" workshop. It's
 particularly useful for CFOs and COOs.

                                                                                           157

---

Scaling Up

Customer and Employee Feedback

      Jack Harrington, CEO of Virtual Technology Corporation (VTC), was hosting the company's first
quarterly offsite to determine the Critical Number and theme. Coming off a previous quarter of
   phenomenal growth, the senior team focused on continuing to drive revenue, aiming to add $6 million
in revenue to the pipeline in the coming quarter.

While there, in preparation for an upcoming strategic-planning offsite, the company conducted an analysis
of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats and a survey of management to learn their top three
  priorities. It also surveyed employees. It found that the frontline team was deeply concerned that VTC
was in danger of failing to deliver on projects already in progress, risking the firm's stellar reputation.

   Fortunately, the senior team was "healthy" enough that an executive spoke up during the offsite and
    advocated for the employees' viewpoint. In the end, Harrington and the team pivoted their focus to
  recruiting, hiring, and onboarding 16 hard-to-find distributed-simulation experts in the next quarter,
   to both relieve pressure on the existing team and prepare VTC for the additional business it planned
to acquire. This removed the constraints on the company.

     Going with a "Sweet Sixteen" theme (who would have imagined that a bunch of techies would enjoy
such a thing!), VTC engaged all 120 employees in the process, structuring internal bonuses for anyone
   in the firm who could recruit one of these specialists. Mara Harrington, Jack's wife and the head of
    human resources, was relieved to get the help, and in the end, the company brought on board 20 of
    these critical team members, exceeding its goal. The following quarter, it followed up with a "Six
  Million Dollar Man" theme based on the classic '70s hit television series (people still talk about VP
    of Sales Doug Greenlaw running into the Quarterly Theme launch event dressed in a Lee Majors-like
red jumpsuit!), where employees continued to pour on the gas and ramp up the sales pipeline.

     Later that year, the company was purchased by Raytheon for a hefty multiple of EBITDA precisely
    because VTC had almost all the quality distributed-simulation experts on its team. It controlled a
  critical constraint/choke point in the industry! In the "Strategy" section, Verne shared Harrington's
 post-VTC story at Raytheon as he went on to head billion-dollar divisions for this global conglomerate.

      WARNING: The Critical Number, like the rest of the organization's strategy, cannot be set in isolation
   from the realities of the company and the marketplace. Employees and customers will think the senior team
      was smoking something if they come down from the mountaintop with "the tablets" pronouncing the latest
strategic plan without having completed the necessary preparation. And as Jack Stack strongly suggests, it's
 best if the Critical Number is benchmarked against an external standard (e.g., "If that company can achieve
12 inventory turns, why can't we?"), so employees don't think the senior team was just making stuff up!


 Theme Creation and Celebration

At ProService, a group of employees who are not part of the executive team developed every as-
 pect of the 600-referral theme. Their efforts included producing a "Happy" video to celebrate the
 achievement of their goal (search "Happy ProService" on YouTube).

158

---

                                                                                                      The Priority

 "Basically, the team said, 'Let's put together a fun video to celebrate achieving our goal,' " says Godsey,
   the president. "They started to riff and innovate, and then invited people to participate in the celebration,
         saying, 'Show us your happy dance.' Different teams made up different fun little dances. And then
bam! The end result of the video was even better."
       As at ProService, you should delegate the actual creation of the theme to a nonexecutive team. Almost
         every company has a team member who is skilled in using a computer to create videos, posters, and
        other themed collateral. The senior team doesn't need another job, and it's best if an employee-run
team drives the theme activities.

  Powerful Celebration Question
             At the celebration, skip the usual speeches by the senior team about "How we couldn't have
  done this, that, or the other thing without so-and-so's help, etc." Instead, ask the most powerful
          question a leader can pose when a team has successfully completed anything: "How did you do it?"
           Stand up and say "Congratulations. We said we would do X, and we did it!! How did you do it?"
             Then pick someone who you know contributed to reaching the Critical Number, and have that
         person share his or her story. This hint is courtesy of Aubrey C. Daniels, author of Bringing Out
          the Best in People: How to Apply the Astonishing Power of Positive Reinforcement (a foundational
       business book that all leaders should read). By the way, if you're a parent, this is a great question
            to ask your children when they come home with a success story. Rather than shower them with
  praise, simply say: "Congrats. So how did you do it?" and let them share their story.

         Nothing builds momentum and energy like hitting specific targets. If your company has been through
       some rough times lately and the culture has taken a couple of body blows, pick some really short-term
 goals, focus everyone on the same thing, "play to win," and get back your mojo!!

                                       Rockefeller Habits #3, #4, #7, and #8
        Rockefeller Habit#3, Meeting Rhythm, will be covered in its own chapter at the end of this section.

        Rockefeller Habits #4, #7, and #8 have already been covered extensively. But here are quick recaps:

      Rockefeller Habit #4 — Every facet of the organization has a person assigned with accountability for en-
          suring goals are met — was covered in "The Leaders" chapter. We include a mention in the chapter
 on "The Priority" because the related worksheets focus on determining the one person accountable
 for the functions, outcomes, and processes of the organization.

 4. Every facet of the organization has a person assigned with accountability for ensuring goals are met.
   The Function Accountability Chart (FACe) is completed (right people, doing the right things, right)
   Financial statements have a person assigned to each line item.
   Each of the 4-9 processes on the Process Accountability Chart (PACe) has someone that is accountable for them.
   Each 3-5 year Key Thrust/Capability has a corresponding expert on the Advisory Board if internal expertise doesn't exist.

                                                                                                                            159

---

Scaling Up

 Rockefeller Habit #7 — Core Values and Purpose are "alive" in the organization — was covered in "The
 Core" chapter. It's important that the Core Values and the Purpose are given priority when making
 hiring (and firing) decisions — and when sharing praise and constructive criticism. It's also crucial
 that the leadership team formulate its one passionate stump speech that can be repeated to reinforce
 the bigger Purpose of the organization.
 7. Core Values and Purpose are "alive" in the organization.
   Core Values are discovered, Purpose is articulated, and both are known by all employees.
   All executives and middle managers refer back to the Core Values and Purpose when giving praise or reprimands.
   H proeses and activities align with heCoreValues and Purpose (hirigrintation, apraisa recognition
   Actions are identified and implemented each quarter to strengthen the Core Values and Purpose in the organization.

Rockefeller Habit #8 — Employees can articulate the key components of the company's strategy ac
curately — was covered in "The One-Page Strategic Plan" chapter. In essence, it speaks to the need
for all employees to understand key aspects of the Vision and Strategy of the business, as reflected
on the Vision Summary worksheet. And it helps drive alignment if all the employees have the same
 "elevator pitch" they share when asked the question, "What does your company do?"
  Employees can articulate the following key components of the company's strategy accurately
  Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG) - Progress is tracked and visible.
  Core Customer(s) - Their profile in 25 words or less.
  3 Brand Promises - And the corresponding Brand Promise KPls reported on weekly.
  Elevator Pitch - A compelling response to the question "What does your company do?"

The balance of the Rockefeller Habits (#5, #6, #9, and #10) will be covered in the next chapter
"The Data.










160

---

10
THE DATA
Powering Prediction



                EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The fundamental job of a leader is prediction, according to the late business
 consultant W. Edwards Deming. At the heart of a leader's ability to predict is data — and lots of it. Big data
 analysis has become mainstream and within reach of companies of all sizes. Yet leaders also need plain old
      human-gathered intelligence to get a gut feel for the market and what is happening in the company, so that
 they can make the right decisions. Talking weekly with customers and employees and then discussing what's
 been learned at the executive huddle is critical. And engaging all of your employees in data collection, with a
 middle-management team leading them, spreads out the work so the senior team doesn't get buried.


        etflix Inc. co-founder and CEO Reed Hastings, Fortune's Businessperson of the Year in 2010,
 N
         fell from grace a year later with the botched introduction of a new pricing scheme and the
 aborted spinoff of its DVD mail-order service under the Qwikster name, which sent customers
 running and the stock plunging. Many insiders claim that Hastings had stopped listening — to
 his team and his customers — and damaged Netflix's reputation by messing with the company's
 (brand) promise of simplicity. Hastings himself admitted his arrogance. Three weeks after an-
 nouncing the Qwikster launch, the San Francisco Bay area company said it would keep its single,
 simple website and login for accessing movies and TV shows — though the price increase for a
 separate DVD service remained.
   Speed forward 30 months, and Hastings was once again a star. Netflix's stock price had more than
 doubled from the year before, and the CEO was riding a wave of global enthusiasm for the company's
 hit series House of Cards, the most streamed piece of content in the US and 40 other countries when
 it was released. Fortune called this the best turnaround of 2013. Hastings continues to bet on original
 content that streams exclusively on his platform. Who knows if Hastings' company will withstand
     the onslaught of competition, but he seems to have a golden touch in predicting precisely what
 consumers around the world want to watch.

 Big Data
  Hastings' secret weapon is data — and massive amounts of it. It is big data analysis that allowed
 him to predict that a series based on the corruption of government, starring Kevin Spacey and
     directed by David Fincher, would be a sure bet. According to KISSmetrics, a leading blog about
 analytics, marketing, and testing, here's a list of some of the "event" data that Netflix tracks for
 its 44 million subscribers:
                                          161

---

 Scaling Up

   When you pause, rewind, or fast-forward
   What days of the week you watch content (Netflix has found that people generally watch
   TV shows during the week and movies over the weekend)
   The dates on which you watch
   What time you watch
   Where you watch (by ZIP code)
  What device you use to watch (Do you use your tablet for TV shows and your Roku for
   movies? Do people access the Just for Kids feature more on their iPads? And so on.)
   When you pause and abandon content (and if you ever come back)
  The ratings given (about 4 million per day)
  Searches (about 3 million per day)
  Your browsing and scrolling behavior
  The way in which businesses use data to make decisions — to predict — is undergoing the most radical
  change since the beginning of commerce. For more on this transformation, read Big Data: A Revolution
         That Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think by Oxford professor Viktor Mayer-Schönberger
 and Kenneth Cukier, data editor of The Economist.

 Intelligence-Gathering
 Data analysis must be augmented with plain old human intelligence-gathering. For all the big data
 computing power that Wal-Mart Stores Inc. possesses, it sends teams from the Bentonville, Arkansas,
headquarters out to stores to gather insight Monday through Thursday, bringing them back Thurs-
 day night. On Friday morning, its executives pore over all the quantitative data from its computer
  systems, along with the qualitative intelligence picked up from talking with customers, meeting with
 employees, and shopping at competitors' stores during the week.
David Glass, former CEO of Wal-Mart and now owner and CEO of the Kansas City Royals basebal
team, recalls this routine well. "We would decide what corrective action we wanted to take [Friday
morning]," he says. "And by noon on Saturday, we had all our corrections in place. Our competitors,
for the most part, got their sales results on Monday for the prior week. Now they're 10 days behind,
 and we've already made corrections."
It's this "learn fast; act fast" cycle that put Wal-Mart ahead of the competition. And as this example
    demonstrates, you don't have to be months or even weeks ahead, just 10 days ahead for more than 50
                               years. Wal-Mart's routine is not just for large companies. Its habit of
 "Learn fast; act fast."  gathering data on employees, customers, and the competition started in
                          1962 with a 6 a.m. meeting every Saturday at Sam Walton's first store.


162

---

                                                                         The Data

Two lessons:
1.Senior leaders need to be in the market 80% of the week, either figuratively or literally.
2. This routine must start on day one and continue through half a trillion in revenue!

Speed is the key. After General Electric's Jack Welch visited Wal-Mart (yes, industrial firms can learn
something from retailers and vice versa), he implemented Quick Market Intelligence, which Jeff Immelt,
    the current CEO of GE, has continued. In essence, all salespeople in GE must communicate daily
   or weekly what they are hearing about competitors and learning in the field from customers. The
organization disseminates their insights rapidly to the rest of its team.

         U NOTE: For an excellent look at the "Growth Process" at GE, read the interview with Immelt in the
        June 2006 issue of the Harvard Business Review. You'll see how GE is using a red, yellow, and green
             measurement system; measuring advocacy by customers using the Net Promoter Score; streamlining
with Lean and Six Sigma techniques; and using Work-Out sessions to garner feedback from employees.
The interview describes a tour de force of best practices that align closely with the ideas in this book.

Metrics Everywhere

  Gazelles' Growth Tools are replete with boxes asking you to pick Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
   and Outcomes. We start with the functions and processes driving the business, then push for the
   company to set goals, delineate measurable Brand Promises, and pick Critical Numbers on the One-
   Page Strategic Plan, including KPIs for both the People and Process sides of the business so the
  leadership team has a balanced view of performance. The challenge is choosing metrics that matter,
   meaning those that measure what's important to customers, and provide sufficient insight to help
both the leadership team and all employees see problems and opportunities in time to react.

  However, quantitative metrics alone provide an incomplete view. Qualitative insights from conver-
  sations with the market and observations of customers and competitors fill out the data set needed
to guide decisions. Input from advisors, experts, and "the crowd" also contribute. Piling all of this
    data into computers and our brains and engaging in healthy, frequent debate helps leaders make
decisions — regarding hiring, product, marketing, etc. — with a high degree of confidence.

 By following processes and routines like these, Roger Hardy and his team at Coastal.com, highlighted
 in the introduction to this section, have scaled up a company that's now worth almost half a billion
 dollars. Following are detailed recommendations and examples of growth firms that are putting these
weekly habits in place to gather the kinds of data — quantitative and qualitative — that are critical
to supporting the important leadership capabilities of prediction, delegation, and repetition.
             WARNING: If talking with customers and employees routinely is so powerful, why do leaders stop
 doing it ? It's because they continue to hear the same recurring issues or praise over and over — and have
to take time from their busy schedules to listen to stories that seem to have zero relevance to their busi-
    nesses. However, it takes only one or two key ideas to fuel a business model. So hang in there, embrace
the human aspects of these conversations, and relish the moment the light bulb goes on — it will!!

                                                                                                  163

---

Scaling Up

  Let's now look at the details of collecting input from employees first: Rockefeller Habit #5.

          Rockefeller Habit #5: Gather Employee Input

 Have you noticed the humongous Big Ass Fans in airports and warehouses around the world?
 Manufacturer Big Ass Solutions, a rapidly growing Kentucky firm, rocketed from $34 million in

 5. Ongoing employee input is collected to identify obstacles and opportunities.
  All executives (and middle managers) have a Start/Stop/Keep conversation with at least one employee weekly.
  The insights from employee conversations are shared at the weekly executive team meeting.
  Employee input about obstacles and opportunities is being collected weekly.
  A mid-management team is responsible for the process of closing the loop on all obstacles and opportunities

revenue in 2009 to $115 million in 2013. More important, its employee retention is 93% vs. a US
    average of 63%. Founder and Chief Big Ass Carey Smith (now that's a title!) has driven a series of
  initiatives. Besides offering top-tier perks - including an on-site health clinic, subsidized catered
    lunches, and a game room (hey, this isn't Silicon Valley) — Smith and his top managers take half a
   dozen workers to dinner at one of the area's best restaurants each week. What better way to tap into
 the rumor mill, pick up ideas, and share a little bit of the company's DNA with the team?

 Bring Every Brain Into the Game

   Walton, back in 1962, saw the value of meeting with employees weekly to seek their ideas for making
     the business better, which was quite progressive at the time. Without a formal routine to prompt
  members of your team to share their perspectives, you risk having those ideas walk out the door at the
   end of every day. Worse yet, your workers miss an opportunity to contribute and feel good about it.
     At a minimum, we recommend that all executives (and middle managers) have a Start/Stop/Keep con-
   versation with at least one employee weekly. Even though you might see a lot of your employees each
  week, stopping by for a casual chat or two, that is not the same as having a 15- to 45-minute focused
conversation with an individual or a group of employees to gather feedback and ideas. Choose em-
     ployees who work directly with customers and those newest to the company. Recent hires will have
fresh eyes that lead them to notice things longer-term employees have come to accept.
Here are three simple questions that we recommend you use when holding these conversations:
  What should we start doing?
  What should we stop doing?
  What should we keep doing?
We encourage leaders to pay particular attention to the "stop doing" responses. They are likely
destroying the motivation of the employees, as we discussed in "The Team" chapter.


164

---

                                     The Data

NOTE: Some might equate these questions to the creation-preservation-destruction cycle from
Hindu mythology.
HINT: In some company cultures, this type of conversation may feel strange at first. Don't be surprised
if there's awkward chitchat at the beginning of the conversations. What's important is that by the end,
you've reminded your employees that it might be months before they have this opportunity for a one-
on-one again. Ask them one more time if there is anything else they think should be started, stopped, or
kept, and they will normally open up.

Markitforce's Employee Lunches
    Founder and Chief Engagement Officer Alan Higgins spends a lot of time focusing on the culture
    at Markitforce, a Sydney-based firm that creates fulfillment campaigns and offers warehousing,
distribution, and account management services in the warehousing industry. He takes one em-
    ployee out for lunch each week to learn more about him. Before the meal, he asks the employee
       to answer a few questions that are discussed during lunch: What should Markitforce start
     doing, stop doing, and keep doing? What does the staffer love and loathe about his job? What
  are his 101 goals in life - both professional and personal? "I tell them to write this stuff down,
because if they write it down, it will happen. Things just start to fall into place," says Higgins.
"It's pretty powerful. And, as a leader, it's my objective to help them check things off their list."


Discuss at the Weekly Management Meeting
Rather than create detailed reports that no one has the time to read, Higgins shares insights from
his conversations with employees at the weekly executive team meeting. He includes 10 minutes on
the agenda for sharing employee feedback (detailed in "The Meeting Rhythm" chapter). Hearing
his stories gives the leaders a better feel for the pulse of the business.

If you plan to act on any concrete "start" or "stop" ideas, feed them into a more formal employee-sug-
gestion process. Also include information from the "stucks" mentioned in the daily huddles, which
we will also describe in the upcoming chapter.

Ongoing Feedback

Collect weekly input from employees about obstacles and opportunities. To keep this from turning
into a collection of gripes, provide some prompts. Ask employees to submit suggestions that will:
1. Increase revenue.
2.Reduce costs.
3. Make something easier/better for the customers or employees.


165

---

 Scaling Up

 Ways to tap into employee ideas include 3M's "15 percent rule," launched in 1948, which allows
        employees to spend a proportion of paid time on projects of their own choosing. Google, Apple,
     and other companies now have similar policies. At Sydney-based software firm Atlassian, employees
 get 24 hours to produce innovations on "ShipIt" days. And Jimmy Calano, who built CareerTrack
 Inc. into the largest one-day-seminar company in the world, and sold it to cable conglomerate TCI,
 implemented what he called a 3I program.

        Each month, every manager (Calano had 40 at the time) had to submit three ideas for increasing
      revenue, reducing costs, or making something easier at the Colorado-based company. Calano would
          spend the Sunday morning before the Monday monthly management meeting going over the 120
     ideas and writing detailed responses, especially for concepts that needed more work to implement.
       He would then choose the top 20 ideas for the month and announce them at the management meet-
 ing, handing each winner a crisp $20 bill for fun.

      The 3I program gave Calano real insight into the gaps in knowledge among his frontline and mid-
 dle managers, affording him many "teachable moments" when responding to their submissions.
       And Calano could document millions of dollars' worth of improvements from these ideas. Equally
     important, having to submit three ideas every month forced all of his managers to seek input from
 frontline employees and customers.

 Close the Loop

 Gathering employees' feedback and ideas will backfire on the company if management doesn't
close the loop and act on their suggestions. At a minimum, let an employee know why an idea
 can't be implemented.

    The biggest obstacle is finding the time. The senior team doesn't need any more to-do's. Therefore,
      we strongly recommend holding a middle-management team responsible for responding to employees'
  feedback on all obstacles and opportunities. This is an excellent executive-development opportunity for
     a group of up-and-coming leaders as they gather and react to the suggestions and work cross-func-
tionally to implement them.

And just as you probably track the number of days you take to pay your vendors (accounts payable days)
 or to get paid (accounts receivable days), we suggest that you track the number of days it takes to imple-
     ment the ideas gathered from your employees. Have the middle-management team that is driving this
    process create a "Suggestion Aging Report" tracking how many ideas are 30, 60, and 90 days past due.

    Last, be transparent with employees. Set up an internal Web portal where all suggestions are listed
 (unedited) with updates on progress, or simply write them on a huge whiteboard in the break room
   and erase them only when they've been addressed. In addition, publish updates in internal newsletters.

   WARNING: Any submissions that single out individuals in a negative way should, of course, be
   handled privately and never be posted.

166

---

                                                                                                   The Data

 Rockefeller Habit #6: Gather Customer Input

6. Reporting and analysis of customer feedback data is as frequent and accurate as financial data.
 All executives (and middle managers) have a 4Q conversation with at least one end user weekly.
 The insights from customer conversations are shared at the weekly executive team meeting.
 All employees are involved in collecting customer data.
 A mid-management team is responsible for the process of closing the loop on all customer feedback.

      Sanjeev Mohanty is the CEO of India's #1 international fashion brand as of 2014, when Benetton
     India Private Ltd. surpassed Levi's to take over the top spot. He attributes the company's rapid
   growth and success to its intense daily interaction with its more than 5 million customers. Through
 a process launched after its first Rockefeller Habits workshop, it placed signs in its stores requesting
   that customers send feedback via email. In addition, as required by law, it prints an email address
on every clothing tag.

    Most retailers merely pay lip service to the notion of listening to customers' complaints and sug-
   gestions. Mohanty automatically receives a copy of every submission and replies directly to several
   every day (while his team follows up on all of the rest). If the customer gave a phone number, he'l
     call the patron. This generates wildly positive word-of-mouth enthusiasm for Benetton India. And
     Mohanty and his team have picked up clues from these conversations that drive many of the inno-
    vative clothing lines outside the company's main offering, which have helped him rapidly scale up
revenue and the brand.
       Down the road in Bangalore, 4,200-employee QuEST Global Engineering Pvt. Ltd. landed a five-
     year, $50 million contract, thanks to its efforts to get feedback from customers. Competing with
      2,000 vendors, QuEST made it into the final two. Ajay Prabhu, COO, made a winning move — right
  into the Marriott hotel across the street from the prospect's offices. Every day, Prabhu and a senior
  vice president met there with people at all levels of the potential customer's company, so they could
improve QuEST's proposal in real time

   "We really gathered all the 'what ifs' and learned what issues might work against us," says Prabhu.
    "When we finally submitted the proposal, all the customer contact had been a game changer for us.
     The customer could see we were paying attention to them and to the details. And we were able to
   make decisions quickly while our competition, being a much larger company, had to go through several
    different layers of management back at HQ to get an answer. In our case, the decision-makers were
right next to the customer. It was like we were camping out together."

QuEST also surveys customers immediately after completing projects. If the results are not satisfac-
    tory, it completes a detailed analysis of what went wrong. However, Prabhu notes, "While customer
  satisfaction is important, there has to be a balance." QuEST uses a triple scorecard approach to sat-
     isfaction — measuring satisfaction among customers, employees, and the company itself. The first
  two, customer (c-stat) and employee (e-stat) satisfaction, are benchmarked against industry standards.
    The third one, QuEST Satisfaction (q-stat), is used to evaluate whether or not to accept projects.
    "We don't take projects until they meet QuEST Satisfaction. It has to be a client that we can make
more efficient and profitable, and it has to fit with our strategy," says Prabhu.

                                                                                                   167

---

  Scaling Up

                                           Conversations With Customers
   We implore all executives and middle managers to have a 4 Questions (4Q) conversation with at least one end
      user weekly. Particularly in business-to-business situations, you may have to bypass your distribution
  channels and purchasing agents (with permission) and talk directly with those benefiting from your
  products and services.

  The 4Q refers to the four questions that we suggest leaders ask customers in person (not on a survey):
   How are you doing?
   2.What's going on in your industry/neighborhood?
   3.What do you hear about our competitors?
   4How are we doing?

      The key is to get them to talk about their favorite subject: themselves!! The first question will give
  you an understanding of their current situation: What are their pain points? What are their priorities
  for the coming year?
  And for salespeople in a B-to-B situation, find out what the person's bonus is tied to. You don't need
  to know the amount, but your goal is to show how your products and services can help them achieve
  their targets.
  The second question offers insight into industry trends in general. What are the newest changes or
  technologies? Who is buying whom in the industry? And if you are talking with consumers, what
  are they and their neighbors thinking/feeling/talking about?
  The third query is probably most important, because it can help you cut through your own biases.
  It was this question that helped Coastal.com realize that it shouldn't lower its prices to ward off
  ankle-biting, low-price competitors. When Hardy's leadership team asked customers point-blank
  what they thought of its competitors, they raved instead about Coastal.com and its rapid response
  to phone calls and customer service.

  Only after you've asked your customers these three questions should you ask about their reactions
  to your offerings, if they have not shared these already. Remember, this call is about them, not you!
 In a business-to-business environment, have all senior leaders connect with their counterparts at
 customers' companies (e.g., your CFO should talk with the client's CFO). Communicating with
 other specialists in their area will allow them to pick up insights others will miss.
Look at these efforts as an investment in customer retention. At rapidly growing companies, the
team is often so busy chasing new opportunities that the existing clients feel ignored. If compa-
nies were able to hold on to the customers they now lose from neglect, it would fuel at least half
 of their growth.

168

---

                                                                          The Data

 Using Social Media
       Coastal.com came out of a two-day planning session struggling with ideas on how to grow. So
       Hardy and his management team decided to call 30 to 40 customers every Friday for feedback.
     To Hardy's surprise, the same theme surfaced: Patrons wanted their contact lenses the next day.
 "Speed is very much a part of the business, and we heard that message from customers," says
     Hardy. When customers order contacts, they are often on their last pair. "We started overnight-
 ing everything, and sales grew 60% in one of our markets," Hardy says.
      Today, Hardy reports that as consumers spend more time on social media, it can be challenging
        to get feedback through phone calls. "We were at a point where we were leaving 40 messages
          and not getting as much feedback. It was unproductive," he says. Now Coastal.com uses
        SurveyMonkey to get feedback immediately after a purchase, using the NPS. The company also
       relies on comments through Facebook, which can be left easily and quickly. "We try to figure
 out hot spots from the comments we get through social media," says Hardy.

Discuss at the Weekly Meeting
Share insights from conversations with customers at the executive team's weekly huddle. Don't bog down the
process with a bunch of written reports.
    At global consulting firm Bain & Co., loyalty practice founder Fred Reichheld and his team found a
   company in almost every sector that was growing top-line revenue 2.5 times faster than its competi-
   tors. So they set out to identify what these companies did differently. At the "good" companies, the
executive team spent zero time discussing what it was hearing from customers at its weekly meeting.
     The only time a customer's name came up was if there was a crisis. (Think about your own weekly
      meeting!) In contrast, the "great" companies — which, like Enterprise Rent-A-Car, were growing
      considerably faster - spent roughly 20% of their leadership team's meeting discussing feedback
from customers.

Involve All Employees (Especially Salespeople)
      Whichever competitor has the most market intelligence, and uses it, wins. The fastest-growing
       companies of this century — Facebook, Google, Amazon, Booking.com, and Netflix — have built
     business models predicated on being able to tap into more input from customers than anyone else.
  Using powerful algorithms to discern correlations from users' actions gives them a great deal of their
   insight. Much of their data also emerges from enticing customers to make comments and leave ratings
 for innumerable products and services online. We're in an era in which people don't trust large institu-
 tions. Instead, they turn to "the crowd" to help them figure out which doctor or vacation spot to visit.
      Appletree Answers, highlighted in the "People" section, built an application on top of its CRM
  system, called Idea Flash, to collect suggestions from its frontline call-center people by the minute.
   With this program, the agents log ideas and issues from customers during live conversations and add
                                                                          169

---

 Scaling Up

             their own suggestions and observations into a central database so these valuable insights do not get
 lost. In the first 90 days (when Idea Flash was Appletree's Quarterly Theme), employees generated
 more than 8,800 ideas, and they have continued to supply the company with 3,000 to 5,000 every
 quarter since. Just one of the thousands of ideas submitted resulted in a $17,000-per-month profit
 for a client. Now that's turning customer feedback into customer service.
 It's particularly important to encourage all your salespeople, distributors, and independent reps (in all
 of your sales channels) to gather and report market intelligence. Require all of them to call in daily to a
 voice mailbox and leave a three-minute update on any positive sales results. (Salespeople like to share
 good news.) Ask them to provide feedback from customers and about competitors and report on barriers
 they are facing in making sales. Do not ask them to put this information in writing, or it won't happen.
 (The only written report is the one you threaten to make them write if they don't call in daily!) Most
             Internet-based phone systems have the capability of converting voice messages into text messages, so
           you will have your salespeople's thoughts in writing without having to listen to a bunch of voice mails.

Again, Close the Loop
As with employee feedback, hold a middle-management team responsible for the process of closing the loop
on all customer feedback. This team normally reports to the senior leader accountable for the customer
advocacy function listed on the FACe chart, which can be found in the "People" section.

  Getting the Most Out of Net Promoter Scores
                We have mentioned the NPS several times throughout the book as our preferred way to measure
              customer satisfaction (advocacy) and engagement. Fred Reichheld popularized it in his book, The
  Ultimate Question: Driving Good Profits and True Growth, and today's revised and expanded version,
             The Ultimate Question 2.0: How Net Promoter Companies Thrive in a Customer-Driven World. In short,
           the idea is that satisfied customers can be passive, transacting with you but not necessarily engaged.
               For growing companies, engaged customers —those that are thrilled enough to tell others about
               you —are critical for profitable growth. The NPS measures the net percentage of your customers
             who are actively spreading the good word about your company. It is a system that Apple, Enterprise
  Rent-A-Car, and hundreds of our clients use to manage this aspect of their business

           1 How does our food taste? #ti&Z.#? (0-10)
           WHERE'S MY TOOTHBRUSH?  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 GIMME MORE!-
           How convenient is it to order from us? as? (0-10)
           3LME NOW 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 EASY A
           Would you recommend us to a friend? e(#M? (0-10)
           NOWAY! 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 EVERY CHANCE IGET
           I   ? YES! NO!
           THANKS foR YOUR TIME! (YoU'RE AWESOME!) WW*MM! (*7!)

               Beijing-based Gung Ho! Pizza uses the NPS to measure customer satisfaction, linking the result
                  each month directly to employee bonuses — along with the four Brand Promises and a sales
170

---

                                                         The Data

target. Each day, every store sends out two questionnaires with delivery people to randomly
selected existing customers, for a total of 60 surveys per month. To keep it simple, the survey
asks four questions, including the NPS question, "Would you recommend us to a friend?" It
also includes a spot for the customer to add a phone number. Then the Gung Ho! Team calls
these customers to learn how the company might do better.


                 Rockefeller Habit #9: KPls for Everyone
 py  ivey hee gy  ol
  or 2 Key Performance Indicators (KPls) are reported on weekly for each role/person.
  E eployee has Critil Number hat aligs with he company's Critial umber ohe quarter clear ne  ht).
  Eandividual/teamas 3- Quartery riorits/Rocks thatalgn with those  the cop.
  All executives and middle managers have a coach (or peer coach) holding them accountable to behavior changes
This habit is linked directly to column of the One-Page Strategic Plan, discussed in the Stra
sn. Itprant  av  cer pan or e cpy or e net quart. I tur,  t
 peron nees dividual quartey als that lg with the panThis creat "e  ,"
 discussed in the "People" section, so every employee feels connected to the vision and direction of
 the company.

 Did I Have a Great Day or Week?
 Every member of the team, from the senior leadership to staffers, needs to be able to answer objec-
 tively the question, "Did I have a great day or week?" The key: Each person must report on one or
 two KPIs weekly.
 Australia-based Shine Lawyers has five measurable goals. All employees in the       YOUR ACCOUNTABILITY
                                                                                          (WhaWhen)
 business have the same goals, with their corresponding KPIs changing depending            YourKPis           Goal
 on their role. "We get alignment this way," shares Managing Director Simon                  KPIs
 Morrion. "And whe you oitoanyone'offie, you'll see ther five oals." Shine
 creates a strategy card for each of the five goals and their corresponding KPIs.                             Due
 "Previously we counted 30 different reports that we were sending our managers,
 so this is a nice, compact way to align everyone's goal to the same tool to manage
 the business," he adds.                                                                 Rocks
          Some companies use a whiteboard that gets updated daily or weekly (and dis-
           cussed at meetings), and some print charts from spreadsheets and post them      Critical #: People or B/S
 on the wall. Still others have dashboard systems, like Align, to automatically          ::
 generate live data. You will succeed only if every team member in your com-             Critical#
 pany looks at the information and makes adjustments or decisions based on               :.
 their KPIs weekly.

                                                                                                              171

---

 Scaling Up

  The most respected leaders of some of the largest companies do the same. A Bloomberg Businessweek
  article titled "The Happiest Man in Detroit," by Keith Naughton, highlights former Ford Motor
  CEO Alan Mulally and his weekly 21½/2-hour Business Plan Reviews with the 15 top Ford executives.
  In this meeting, Mulally's direct reports were required to "post more than 300 charts, each of them
  color-coded red, yellow, or green to indicate problems, caution, or progress." There was no hiding
  from data with Mulally at the helm. As he said: "You can't manage a secret. When you do this every
  week, you can't hide." Clearly, the charts were telling the truth, and through this rigorous discipline,
  Mulally and the leadership team drove changes that without a doubt drove profits.

  One Critical Number and 3 to 5 Rocks
  Everyone is busy. The magic of the Scaling Up process is getting everyone in the company to accom-
  plish one additional thing that is aligned with the company's focus every 90 days (i.e., each employee
 has one Critical Number that aligns with the company's Critical Number for the quarter, llustrating that there
 is a clear line of sight). If you have 10 employees, you can get 10 more things accomplished; if you have
 1,000 employees, you can get even more done.
 And like the company, all employees or teams need to set a handful of priorities (known as rocks)
that will help them achieve their Critical Number (i.e., each individual/team should have three to five
rocks that align with those of the company).
AmRest Holdings SE, an international restaurant company based in Poland, uses a scorecard system
across the whole company called its Disciplined Operating System (DOS+). The scorecards are inte-
grated with the company's One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP), giving everyone insight into exactly how
the company is performing against its KPIs, which span financial, people, and customer metrics. DOS
starts at the restaurant level by the 2nd of each month and then rolls up to the regional level, district
level, brand president, and division president before the scorecards come to co-founder and Chairman
Henry McGovern by the 7th of each month. Go to scalingup.com to see some of these scorecards.

Peer Coach
All executives and middle managers should have a coach (or peer coach) holding them accountable for
behavioral changes. We strongly encourage companies to get an external coach (ideally, a Gazelles
International Certified Coach) to lead their quarterly and annual planning sessions, and check in
monthly to monitor progress.
Everyone should find a peer coach internally at the company, too. Based on your own column 7 of the
OPSP and decisions you made on your own One-Page Personal Plan (discussed in "The Leaders"
chapter), choose five behaviors or actions you need to start or stop, and then report your progress each
day to your peer coach. For more details, search for "Marshall Goldsmith peer coach" on the Web,
and you'll find a free document that further details the process. We also have the link on scalingup.com.

172

---

                                                                                         The Data

           Rockefeller Habit #10: Scoreboards Everywhere
 10. The company's plans and performance are visible to everyone.
 A situation room" is established for weekly meetings (physical or virtual).
  Core Values, Purpose and Priorities are posted throughout the company.
  Scoreboards are up everywhere displaying current progress on KPls and Critical Numbers
  There is a system in place for tracking and managing the cascading Priorities and KPls.
We're not big on using sports analogies in business books. In sports, the team gets to practice 90%
of the time and perform 10%. In business, it's the opposite: We're lucky if we get 10% of the time to
practice through executive training and development.
However, we can all take a page from sport facilities. Even if you're seated in the nosebleed section
of a stadium and can barely see the action on the field, you can always see the score. And now that
hiobhelmi soar valblyoollwihe
team and sport should be the standards by which we monitor our own company performance.
Here's a photo of the digital scoreboard at Australian experi-                           1.64M  51,922
ence-gifts retailer RedBalloon, one of several visible to everyone          12 davs
in the company and updated in real time. We like how it is made             76,697       568    277
to look like an old-fashioned set of paper charts, though this is all
 displayed on a large flat-screen monitor.
 At a minimum, have your metrics, goals, and plans up big and
 visible in a place where you host the various weekly meetings
 (i.e., establish a "situation room" for weekly meetings, whether they're
physical or virtual. In the case of a virtual meeting, the "room" might
 be a particular conference line).
 Here's what the meeting room looks like at The Miner Cor-
 poration, a Texas-based company serving the warehousing and
 materials-management industries — including a bigger-than-life
 printout of its OPSP.
 Make sure that the Core Values, Purpose, and Priorities are posted throughout the company. At Ezypay,
Australisargestdirectdebit service provider,Core Values are isplayeon wall round the off
in some cases from floor to ceiling, including in the boardroom.

 empathetic
           The EZYPAY
           person is.





173

---

Scaling Up

To support daily meetings in its head office, Gung Ho! Pizza
created a "situation room" that has all the key elements of its
culture, Purpose, and KPIs visible for everyone to see.
Also, highly visible on a wall in the back of each location are    R
                                                                   1
these same key elements of the situation room — including the      2
                                                                              I
OPSP — distilled down to the store level for frontline teams to see.
Jade Gray and John O'Loghlen, co-founders of Gung Ho! Pizza, are building a franchise model.
Making it simple for employees in the stores to see the same information as employees at headquarters
is essential to building engagement. "We have numerous locations, and employees don't always have
a chance to come to the head office," says Gray. "Everyone from our cleaner to our store manager
can look at the wall [in their store] at the start of each daily meeting. This ensures we are aligned.
I can walk into a store and speak with a cleaner and nine times out of 10, he or she can tell me what
the Purpose of the company is and give me the meaning behind it and why we're in business. How
to align the entire team is the biggest thing this methodology has taught me.'

Accountability Management Systems
At some point, when the company is bigger than 50 employees and expanding into multiple locations,
keeping track of all the cascading priorities, metrics, and data can become an Excel-spreadsheet night-
mare. And as a growing company must continue to upgrade its accounting, CRM, and operational
systems, it is important o have a ystemin placeor tracking andmanaging the cascading Prioriti an KPIs.
There are several software-as-a-service offerings that give you the capability to update your OPSP
online and track all the KPIs and Priorities that arise from a disciplined execution process — and track
via your smartphones and tablets. Gazelles has outstanding offerings, one being Alignwithgazelles.com,
which gives you the capability to update your OPSP online and track all the KPI's and Priorities that
arise from a disciplined execution process — and track via your smartphones and tablets.
Having a single place to house all of this very important data, not only makes your business run more
efficiently, but your team as a whole will have much greater transparency and alignment to the big
company objectives that you set.
The end goal is to keep the output from the Growth Tools top-of-mind, like the score of your favorite
individual athlete or team.
In the final chapter of the "Execution" section, we outline a set of meeting rhythms that give
 everyone a routine through which al the input, data, and metrics can be discussed and debated, and
 decisions can be made.




174

---

    11
    THE MEETING RHYTHM
   The Heartbeat of the Organization



     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: To move faster, pulse faster. At the heart of a team's performance is a rhythm
                           owell aiy, weeklymny, qarerly dlmeegs.Theeig ri ad al
 provide an opportunity to solve problems more quickly, and ultimately save time. They also address the #1
challenge people face when they work together: communications. In this chapter, we outline specific agendas
   and recommendations on who should attend meetings. The monthly meeting is a KEY routine for developing
 middle managers into mini-CEOs so they are capable of running the business (execution), freeing up senior
    leaders to focus on strategy. We'll also look at the #1 roadblock to effective meetings: generalities


    eading Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr., by Ron Chernow, Verne was struck by the mag-
    lunch, and talk with them. At first, the meetings included only Rockefeller and the four co-founders
    of Standard Oil. But as the decades wore on and the company grew, the meetings came to include
    Rockefeller's nine directors. And yes, they continued to meet daily.
    A century later, Steve Jobs repeated the same ritual, having lunch almost every day with Apple de-
    sign genius Jonathan Ive. Octogenarian investor T. Boone Pickens credits a routine of daily strategy
    meetings, including breakfast each morning with his team, for turning $2.7 million into billions.
    Consciously or not, these leaders understood the root meaning of the word company: "to share bread."
    By gathering their team each day for a meal, they strengthened their personal and professional
    relationships. Fortified for another day, each could go out and do his share to conquer his industry
    or whatever the current target might be. Did it matter that the meetings occurred daily? No doubt
    Rockefeller and Jobs would have said an emphatic "Yes!"
    And the benefits? "We all know each other very well," said Pickens, commenting about his team in an
    interview honoring him as D CEO's CEO of the Year at age 85. "We shouldn't make many mistakes, and
    we don't make many." Communicating frequently and breaking bread together assure that this is the case.

    Great Music vs. Noise

    Great growth firms are a lot like great jazz bands. While jazz is improvisational and entrepreneur-
    ial-like, the discipline underlying it allows even musicians who have never played together before to
    perform a rocking jam session. This requires four things:
                                                                        175

---

    Scaling Up

    1. Assembling talented musicians: They play a variety of instruments, creating a unique sound.
    2. Knowing the rules: All jazz musicians must master a handful of fundamentals (the Core).
    3.Performing the same song: This is the equivalent of the One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP).
    4. Playing to the same beat: What the drummer communicates to the band, the meeting
              rhythm does for the organization (alignment).

    All of this structure allows for constant and endless improvisation by each player, which is what makes
        jazz unique and powerful. Imagine if all members of your team could independently and confidently
    wing it in their roles in a way you knew would be consistent with the company culture and objectives.

    Yet playing jazz isn't easy. Great jazz bands just make it look that way. The same goes for great
       companies. Exceptional firms produce something beautiful, and the rest just make a bunch of noise.

              "The Meeting Rhythm"               The "People" and "Strategy" sections of
                                                                 this book touch on the jazz band equiva-
              or         $trc{2 r    $\frac{{ }$           lents of the first three factors listed above:
                                                                including A Players, relying on the Core,
       2Day₂  1 1 Day 2              1 Day          1 Day           and getting everyone on the same page
                         3 J                  d  (using the OPSP). This chapter addresses
                                                                the all-important drumbeat of the organi-
                                                                 zation. And it is a rhythm of communica-
    Months                                                      tion that drives alignment throughout the
    Weeks
    Days                                                         organization - a steady day-day-day-day-
        10%                                                          week, day-day-day-day-week, day-day-
    is the coal!                                                     day-day-week, day-day-day-day-month.
                                                            (We'll spare you the entire year!)

    Regular meetings act as place holders in everyone's calendar. Because it often takes longer to set up
      meetings than it does to hold them, pre scheduling reduces hassles in organizing them. Most matters
   can wait for the daily huddle or the weekly meeting. Bigger issues, which necessitate getting everyone
    in a room for a few hours, can be addressed during the monthly management meeting.

       In the best-run global companies, the CEO's calendar is preprogrammed 200+ days of the year. For a
  glimpse into these meeting rhythm disciplines, read Chapter 11 on meetings in Managing Up: How to Forge
    an Effective Relationship With Those Above You, by Rosanne Badowski. She is Jack Welch's longstanding
executive assistant and has written a book that we highly recommend all executive assistants read. Welch,
        former CEO of General Electric, had his calendar of meetings planned a year in advance, including
    the one day each month he spent teaching and learning at Crotonville, GE's executive training center.

    As the diagram above indicates, this rhythm of meetings shouldn't require more than 10% of a standard
        40-, 50-, or 60-hour workweek for the senior leadership; 5% to 7% for middle managers, and 3% for
    frontline staff. Naturally, there will be other meetings - with customers, suppliers, investors, etc.
    (which is why Welch had so many meetings) — but this daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, and yearly
    rhythm of meetings is sufficient to manage the business.

    176

---

                                                              The Meeting Rhythm

    More Frequent Meetings

    Many companies have quarterly and annual meetings. In our methodology, the key agenda for these
    meetings is updating the Growth Tools, including the OPSP.

  Having more frequent routines makes it easier to attain goals. This is why the daily, weekly, and
  monthly meetings are critical. They drive the deliverables outlined in the less frequent meetings,
 with each meeting building upon the next. Plus, teams need regular, face-to-face huddles to discuss
 new opportunities, strategic concerns, and bottlenecks as they arise. How many hours is it going to
take to hammer out a set of goals for a new year, if the annual meeting is the first time anybody has
    talked about where the market is going or dealt with the tactical issues that come up weekly?

    Competing on Internet Time
    The faster you're growing, the faster your meeting rhythm should pulse. In general, if you're
    growing less than 15% per year, you can treat each year like a year from a strategic-thinking
    standpoint. If you're growing 20% to 100% a year, view each quarter as if it were a year. That
   means possibly adjusting your strategy every 90 days. If you're among the elite, more than dou-
   bling your revenue each year, you're living the equivalent of "dog years" and need to treat each
    month as if it were a year. For more discussion on this hyperpulsing style of management, read
   the seminal book Competing on Internet Time: Lessons From Netscape and Its Battle With Microsoft
    by Michael A. Cusumano and David B. Yoffie.


    A Case for More Storytelling
    Before digging into the specifics of meeting rhythms, let us make a case for upping the overall talk
    time in organizations. To do this, we need to go back in time. It's estimated that humans have been
    around for 200,000 years, the spoken word for 100,000, the written word for just over 5,000 years,
    and electronic spreadsheets for less than 50!



    "Bekos!"  UU

    200,000 years ago  100,000 years ago    50 years ago
                                            5,000 years ago



    177

---

 Scaling Up

 Two things have been crucial to humans' survival. One is pattern recognition, the most important
  cognitive skill connected to extreme success in any field. The other is hearing. You can hear prey long
 before you can see, touch, or taste it (or it tastes you!). Hearing stories, information, and even num-
   bers connects more deeply to our pattern-recognition capabilities than staring at Excel spreadsheets.
       On the flip side, brain-wave scans show that we need to talk out our problems. When we speak,
 the prefrontal cortex of our brain — the source of executive and cognitive power — lights up like a
     Christmas tree. It's this power that members of the Young Presidents' Organization, Entrepreneurs'
 Organization, Vistage, and other CEO organizations experience in their monthly forums (confi-
   dential meetings of eight to 10 leaders free to talk about anything). Ninety percent of the benefit is
      the chance members get to speak about the deeper challenges or bigger opportunities facing them.

 Walk-and-Talks
        "Walk-and-talks" became a favorite problem-solving technique of Steve Jobs. Science backs up
      the power of this simple routine. It's rooted in the same principles that underlie Eye Movement
        Desensitization and Reprocessing, a new therapy successful in helping people who suffer from
        trauma, anxiety, panic, disturbing memories, post-traumatic stress and many other emotional
       problems. It involves the bilateral stimulation of both sides of the brain by moving the eyes
     left and right repeatedly. (If you catch yourself bouncing your legs when stressed, it's the same
      mechanism). Walking is found to have a similar calming effect that brings the brain down from an
      agitated beta state to a more focused and calm alpha state. Combine walking with talking, some-
     thing Jobs and Rockefeller did a lot of, and you have a powerful cognitive tool at your disposal.

 Since the advent of texting, speaking has gone out of style. It is coming back with technologies like Siri
   and Cortana, that are getting us engaged once again in talking (and hearing) — which our brain loves!

Three Powerful Advantages to Meeting Regularly

The two main arguments we hear for not meeting regularly, especially for the daily huddle:
 1.We don't have the time.
 We see each other all day anyway.

 To address the time issue: If your meetings follow our agendas, they save time. If you need a colleague's
  input to answer a customer's question, you don't have to tell the caller, "I'll try to find her and get
back to you sometime today." You can name the time, because you know you'll have the answer by the
    end of your daily (or weekly) meeting. Nor will you be going over the same water-cooler conversation
three or four times, as is the case when you rely on chance hallway meetings for communication.
Because everyone is together in a daily meeting, things get communicated quickly and accurately.


178

---

                                                                         The Meeting Rhythm

       As for the second point: Bumping into each other all day doesn't substitute for tightly focused team
       discussions. And a lot of that bumping is causing unnecessary interruptions. Casual encounters fail
 to take advantage of the three most powerful tools a leader has in getting team performance:
   Peer pressure
   2. Collective intelligence
   3. Clear communication

         By holding one-on-one conversations with their team members in lieu of a weekly meeting, leaders
     lose these advantages. Unless these individual sessions are for coaching, there can be a lot of private
 negotiating going on ("You know what I'm up against. ..."), putting the leader in the constant
position of being the bad guy.

     Meeting as a group, in contrast, takes the heat off the leader and creates peer pressure that increases
           the rate of deliverables. What a shame to have a high-powered executive or middle-management
      team that doesn't take even 15 minutes each day or an hour a week to focus its collective intelligence
          on the opportunities at hand. Last, holding a team meeting means that everyone is hearing the
          same information. You don't have to repeat the same message three or four times in one-on-ones
 or casual conversations.

 Let's look more closely at the specific meetings and agendas that drive alignment and communi-
 cation — Rockefeller Habit #3.

     Rockefeller Habit #3: Meeting Rhythm

 3. Communication rhythm is established and information moves through organization accurately and quickly.
     All employees are in a daily huddle that lasts less than 15 minutes.
     All teams have a weekly meeting.
     The executive and middle managers meet for a day of learning, resolving big issues, and DNA transfer each month
     Quarterly and annually, the executive and middle managers meet offsite to work on the 4 Decisions.

This rhythm of meetings is designed to support cascading communication around the priorities and
metrics-driving strategy. Specifically:
  1.The daily huddle. A 5- to 15-minute meeting to discuss tactical issues and provide updates.
    This will help you avoid minor train wrecks and to take quick advantage of unforeseen op-
    portunities. Normally, a daily huddle saves everyone an hour or so of needless email updates
    and ad hoc interruptions. Issues that emerge drive the main topics for the weekly meeting.
  2. The weekly meeting. A 60- to 90-minute discussion to review progress on the quarterly
    priorities and tap the collective brainpower of the team in addressing one or two main
    topics. This meeting also provides a time to discuss the market intelligence gathered that
    week from customers, employees, and competitors. Repeated patterns of discussion deter-
    mine the one or two main issues for the monthly meeting

                                                                                                                    179

---

 Scaling Up

 3.The monthly management meeting. A half- to full-day meeting, in which all senior, mid-
   dle, and frontline managers come together to learn and collaboratively address one or two
   big issues requiring several hours of effort. It's also designed to transfer DNA (knowledge,
   values, approach) from upper to middle management.
 The quarterly and annual planning meetings. At this one- to three-day offsite meeting,
   leaders update the Growth Tools and establish the next quarterly and/or annual theme.
   Once each quarter, the leadership team shares an update of the new plans with all employ-
   ees in a 45-minute meeting.
    NOTE: Examine the meeting rhythm above in reverse order to see how the more frequent gathering
    draw context and continuity from the longer and more strategic planning sessions. Specifically:
   The annual sets the strategic direction and priorities for the year and beyond.
   The quarterly breaks these longer-term priorities into bite-sized priorities that the
    company can digest.
   The monthly addresses the bigger issues or opportunities that surface around the
    strategic direction.
   •The weekly keeps the priorities top-of-mind and drives discussions around input from
    customers, employees, and competitors, which feeds back into the quarterly and annual
    planning processes.
   The daily huddle tracks progress and brings out sticking points that are blocking
    execution of the strategic direction.

 Let's take a look at each type of meeting in more depth, examining the structure, timing, and agenda.
 Equally important, we'll look at why these meetings often fail and discuss how to avoid the pitfalls.

                              The Daily Huddle
 When Verne labeled the daily huddle an absolute necessity in Mastering the Rockefeller Habits, it was
because only a few companies were utilizing this important routine. Today, tens of thousands of
 companies around the world have discovered the freedom and power that comes from implementing
 this simple rhythm. You even see the daily huddle in best practices like the iterative agile software
 development framework called Scrum.

 In some cultures, issues of saving face make it diffi-
 cult to share the brutal facts (e.g., the "stucks" men-
 tioned in the daily huddle agenda below). With the
 help of our coaching partners in Asia and the role
modeling of pioneering firms like Ammex Corp. in
Shanghai, the daily huddle is now a given in organi-
 zations that are serious about making the process of
 scaling up faster and easier.
                                                        Ammex CEO Fred Crosetto's daily huddle with his senior team.
180

---

                                                                           The Meeting Rhythm

    What Kills the Daily - and Most - Meetings?

If the daily huddle is so powerful, why do organizations start and then stop it? In a word, generalities!
 As teams tell stories and share information, it's critical that they include specifics. We need to hear
    names, numbers, dates, issues, and concerns if our brain is going to make the kinds of connections
    that make this process powerful. For instance, if one colleague asks, "What's up tomorrow?" a re-
  sponse like, "I have a meeting with a client" is too vague. More specific and useful is, "I'm meeting
     with Acme CEO Bob Smith at 10 a.m. to discuss co-hosting a 60-person 'Mastering the Rockefeller
     Habits' workshop in Cincinnati in the middle of November." These details, which take only a few
    additional seconds to share, let your team compare this data with information in their own heads:
    Acme is still around and based in Cincinnati -I thought Columbus.
    Bob is still CEO of Acme.
    I might want to participate in the 10 a.m. discussion.
    Is 60 the right number of participants? I thought we agreed on 80.
    Does the middle of November work, given our other commitments?

    Timing — Set the start of the daily huddle at an odd time, like 8:08 or 16:16. People are more likely to
   be on time than if you schedule the meeting on the quarter-hour or half-hour. And start the meeting
  on time, whether everyone is present or not. You don't have a lot of time to waste, and it's important
   to set that tone from the beginning. It's also important to end on time, not letting the meeting run
longer than 15 minutes, or people will drop the habit. We suggest setting a timer for the first few weeks
     of meetings and ending on time even if the agenda isn't complete. Team members will learn to get
    to the point and move on to the next item. Plan 1 minute per person, meaning that an eight-person
      team should expect an eight-minute daily huddle. Time of day? Doesn't matter. Choose whatever
    time best fits the rhythm of the business

      Setting — Meet wherever you want, but stand up or perch on stools. It'll help keep the meeting
   short. Gathering in the leader's office makes it more convenient for him or her. If some people will
   dial in regularly, put everyone on a conference call. There's nothing worse than having a few people
       huddled around a speaker phone every day. We also recommend against using videoconferencing,
    which adds one more level of technology complexity. The exceptions are fixed-based operations that
    communicate every day. RS Software uses teleconferencing to host its daily standup meeting across
    12½ time zones between its offices in Kolkata and Milpitas, California.
    Who Attends — The general rule is to have more people in fewer meetings, rather than fewer people
  in more meetings. That's true even if only 10 to 15 participants do most of the sharing. At Microsoft,
     daily meetings can host up to 60 developers, though only 20 gather in a conference room and the
    rest attend via the videoconferencing tool NetMeeting when working on a new software release. The
   Riz-Carlton gathers about 80 people at headquarters for a 10-minute Daily Line-Up to receive updates
    from Boston to Bali. Meanwhile, ll 35,000 Ritz-Carlton employees participate in some kind of Daily
                                      LUpal os.  l  e   LiUps. It
    in management will be in two: one with their direct reports and one with their peers and leader.
                                                                           181

---

 Scaling Up

           HINT: Daily huddles keep projects between companies/suppliers/customers on time and on budget.
    Let's say you're working with an IT service provider to install a new CRM system, or with a construc-
    tion company to build a new facility. Choose someone from your team to interface with a contact on
     the supplier's team and walk through the same three agenda items listed below. This will keep commu-
    nication flowing and guarantee your project will get more attention and action.
         WARNING: We had a client implement daily huddles associated with half a dozen internal projects.
    The problem: The project teams shared many of the same members, so individuals found themselves in
    three to five daily huddles, which is unworkable. The solution was to host one daily huddle involving
      all team members associated with the projects. Only the project leads provide updates (covering six
      projects in six minutes), and then team members spend the balance of the 15 minutes self-organizing
     into ad hoc groups to discuss items of interest. This gathering gave everyone a nice 15-minute break
       from the daily routine and provided the time and place where people could catch up with each other
    without having to track down and interrupt colleagues the rest of the day.
          Who Runs the Meeting — Pick someone who is naturally structured and disciplined (that might not
             be the CEO) to keep meetings running on time. The leader should use a countdown stopwatch to
 make sure that no part of the agenda runs away with the meeting. The person running the meeting
      also has the important job of saying, "Please take it offline" whenever people get off on a tangent
 that doesn't require everybody's attention.

 The Agenda — The agenda should be the same every day, and it's just three items long, with five
 minutes maximum per item:
   What's up (in the next 24 hours)?
   2.What are the daily metrics? (All companies should have some.)
   3.Where are you stuck (constrained)?
Some teams will mention significant results from the previous day. The Ritz-Carlton and Towne
Park, a hotel parking service headquartered in Maryland, review one of their Daily Basics during the
daily huddle. Don't pile too much into the daily huddle, or it's going to extend past the 15-minute
limit and people will start to resent the meeting.
    WARNING: Avoid checking up on whether someone did something the previous day. Team members
    will start feeling like they are being micromanaged. In general, looking forward is great management;
    looking backward is micromanagement.
                                                           Daily - Agenda
Expanding upon the agenda:
  What's up: In the first five minutes, each attendee             What's Up?
  spends a few seconds (up to 30) sharing very specifi-           Daily Metrics?
  cally what's up in the next 24 hours (between today's           Where are you Stuck?
  huddle and tomorrow's). The idea is to let people
  detect conflicts, crossed agendas, and missed opportu-
  nities immediately. These updates should relate to key
   activities, meetings, decisions, etc., and should NOT
182

---

                                                       The Meeting Rhythm

  be a recitation of someone's daily calendar in 15-minute increments! Team members at Mon-
day's huddle don't need to hear about the sales meeting that happens every Tuesday morning
unless there's something unusual or critical coming up.
Daily metrics: The next five minutes are spent verbalizing the daily metrics that the company
  monitors: website hits, open positions, proposals submitted, daily sales, cash, workplace acci-
  dents, number of consultants deployed, etc. Remember, you're looking for patterns and trends.
  Since it generally takes six data points to constitute a trend, it's going to take months to see
 patterns if you look at metrics only every 30 days. If you meet once a day, you'll have a jump on
 the competition and on your own challenges. We know you may be getting this data in writ-
       ten form. Verbalizing it makes it more visceral for the person sharing, while, in turn, hearing
        it makes it easier for the team to absorb. The more senses are engaged, the better your team's
  ability to pick up trends and patterns.
Stucks/Constraints: This is the most important agenda item. You want members of the team
       to bring up constraints and concerns that could prevent them from having a great next 24 hours
(i.e., What's the rock in their shoe? What's keeping them awake at night or worrying them? Are
       they stuck because of another team member?) The brutal facts need to be shared, and the leader
needs to see the patterns of "stucks" to understand what underlying issues must be addressed.
      There are a couple of reasons why we consider this last part of the agenda crucial. First, there's
          something powerful in simply verbalizing - for the whole group to hear — your fears, your
      struggles, and your concerns. It's the first step in solving the problem, because until the mouth
       starts moving, the brain won't engage. Second, you want to focus your team's energy on breaking
through constraints.

    NOTE: Team members should share a "stuck" even if they don't think there's anyone on the team who
    can help them resolve it. Verbalizing the issue is likely to spur unexpected action to help them.

   WARNING: Anytime somebody goes two days without reporting a constraint, you can bet there's a
       bigger problem lurking. Busy, productive people who are doing anything of consequence get stuck pretty
      regularly. The only people who don't get stuck are those who aren't doing anything or are so stuck that
   don't know it!! So, challenge the team member who reports, "Everything is fine!"

         WARNING: Important as they are, conversations about bottlenecks shouldn't be allowed to drift into
      problem-solving. It's okay if somebody wants to reply to a "stuck" by saying, "Call so-and-so," or, "I'l
    get on that right away" (if he or she is the "stuck"!), but take anything more than that offline. Remember:
    The daily meeting needs to be kept short

                                              The Weekly Meeting
    If the daily huddles are functioning well, they will lead to immediate action on scores of issues that
        would otherwise clog up the weekly meeting. You don't want to spend the weekly meeting poring
     over updates. Everyone should be well-informed via the daily huddles. You also don't want to address
     the dozens of issues that have accumulated over the week. The idea of the weekly meeting is to keep
      everyone laser-focused on the #1 priority — and the big rocks supporting that mission. You want to
                                                                                                     183

---

 Scaling Up

     tap the collective intelligence of the team for 30 to 60 minutes on one or two important topics. This
 affords the group an opportunity to resolve 50 to 100 important things in a year.
   HINT: Does your organization spread out its functional meetings throughout the week, thinking that
   it's best not to take up too much of any one day? If so, let us suggest that you do just the opposite. Pick
         one morning or afternoon, and host ALL of your functional and project meetings back-to-back. This
   allows everyone to get in a meeting mindset and flow, and frees senior management to spend the rest of
   the week out in the marketplace. We picked up this idea from Rick Kay and his team at OTG Software.

       Kay and three colleagues launched the software company in 1992 and grew it through the '90s.
      They took it public in 2000, sold it to Legato Systems for $403 million in 2002, and stayed on
 until Legato was sold to EMC a year later for $1.4 billion, resulting in a nice double payout to
 Kay and his team.

 Kay's weekly meeting rhythm started Monday morning at 7 a.m., when he hosted a breakfast meet-
 ing with the three senior executives who helped him launch the company. This was Kay's "council"
 meeting. The foursome chalked up significant talk time around the challenges and opportunities
 facing the growing company.
 At 8 a.m., the rest of the senior team, along with Kay's assistant Andy Cleary, joined the meeting
 for a one-hour meeting of the executive team. At the end, Cleary would summarize "Who's going to
 do What, When." These were very action-oriented meetings focused on addressing key issues and
 making decisions, not mind-numbing reviews.

 We will illustrate next the real meeting innovation, which we have shared with thousands of other
            firms. Whereas most companies spread their functional meetings throughout the week, Kay's team
     concentrated them all in one morning. From 9 a.m. to noon, the entire senior management team of
 eight stayed for a series of functional meetings. The complete agenda:
 7 a.m. - 8 a.m.: Breakfast meeting
 8 a.m. - 9 a.m.: Executive team
 9 a.m. - 10 a.m.: Sales and marketing
 10 a.m. - 11 a.m.: Software development
 11 a.m. - 12 p.m.: Accounting and finance
 This afforded middle and frontline teams direct access to the entire senior leadership team. (The company
 had roughly 400 employees around the time Verne was working with it, just before and just after its IPO.)

   Imagine the power to resolve dozens of issues right on the spot. If a press release needed approval,
everyone (including the CFO, the VP of sales, and the software development and marketing chiefs)
was there to review and resolve it in minutes. It didn't float around in emails for days, sucking up
hours of management's time. If Sales was having a problem with the CRM system, the head of IT
was there. If Development needed to hire additional programmers, the head of HR and the CFO
were there to start the process and sign off on the budget.
184

---

                                                                                    The Meeting Rhythm

In fact, Kay had a rule: Do not email big files (or links to websites, as in "When you have time, please
look over these updates to the software interface"). Instead, the company gave team members time
     in the meetings to pull up a website or read through a contract, as Jeff Bezos allows at Amazon's
weekly meetings. This gave people time to review and respond in a dynamic, synchronous fashion,
with Kay pushing for decisions rather than defaulting to a follow-on meeting. And at the end of each
      functional meeting, Kay's assistant would summarize the "Who, What, When," so the entire company
was clear on the functional priorities for the week.
At noon, everyone headed for lunch and in some cases to the airport, interacting in the market for the
balance of the week with no other management meetings (except their daily check-in). This meeting
rhythm resulted in more decisions and more real work accomplished in half a day than most senior
teams get done in weeks or months. And although OTG's customers were unable to reach senior
leaders during those Monday-morning meetings, they found management unusually available the
rest of the week. We highly recommend that you adopt this best practice, dedicating several hours
a week to get in the flow and work on the business, project by project, function by function. Then
you're finished except for a daily, 15-minute touch point.
When it was time for the daylong monthly meeting, OTG held these on Mondays, combining its
weekly and monthly activities. The same held true for the quarterly and annual meetings, each
of which consumed a Monday as well. Mondays were meeting day, like Fridays are for FedEx
 and Wal-Mart.
     The Schedule — Schedule the meeting for the same time, same place each week. Set aside 30 minutes
for frontline employees, 60 to 90 minutes for middle and executive teams. Since the Gazelles team is
spread across 121/ time zones, from Hyderabad to Portland, Oregon, our several hours of meetings
on Mondays are held via conference call. It works.

 Let's look at the suggested agenda for a weekly team meeting:

 The Agenda
  Five minutes: Good news. Start each weekly meeting with five minutes of good news, both
  personal and professional. Sharing professional good news creates a positive start to the
  meeting and helps generate momentum - good news begets good news. The personal
  good news keeps the team connected at a human level, lets everyone express gratitude, and
  normally results in a good belly laugh or two. Laughter releases tension and brings the brain
  down into a better alpha state, preparing the team to tackle the important issues and deci-
  sions for the week. This important routine also serves as a mental health check. If someone
  has gone a couple of weeks without sharing specific good news, the leader should inquire
  privately to see if everything is okay.
  10 minutes: The priorities. Review the status of the Red, Green, and Super Green priorities
  (discussed in "The Priority" chapter) and discuss any gaps in progress. Also review any metrics
  not reported in the daily huddles.

                                                                                             185

---

Scaling Up

   10 minutes: Customer and employee feedback.                Weekly - Agenda
   Spend this time reviewing specific feedback from
     customers and employees. What issues are crop-                   Good News - 5 mins
    ping up day after day? What are people hearing?                   Priorities & The Numbers - 10 mins
                                                                      Customer/Employee Data - 10 mins
             NOTE: Draw a line in your mind. This first 25            Collective Intelligence - 30 mins
        minutes warms up the brain and allows you to share            Who, What, When Summary
    enough internal and external data to help the team                One Phrase Close
    see patterns and trends in the performance of the
    company. The next 35 to 65 minutes are designated
    for putting the team's collective intelligence to work
    and making important decisions.

 30 to 60 minutes: One or two topics. Focus the team's undivided attention and collective in-
  telligence on a key topic or two. Base your choice on the patterns and trends from the daily
 huddles, progress on your priorities/theme, feedback from your employees and customers, and
  the opportunities and challenges that have surfaced. If a firm wants to discuss a potential part-
 nership, schedule it for this time. If a major event is coming up and you need some decisions
 made, give it priority. At Gazelles, Verne sometimes knows the topic well in advance. Other
 times, he emails an agenda the night before, or the issue surfaces during the meeting. If you
 have a handful of priorities for the quarter, the weekly meeting affords you an opportunity to
 review each a couple of times each quarter.
  Who, What, When (WWW). Take a couple of minutes to                  Execution: Who What When (WWW)  Gazelles
  summarize "Who said they are going to do What, and
 When," and email the notes to everyone.
 One-phrase close. End your weekly meeting by asking
each attendee to sum up with a word or phrase of reac-
tion. It creates a formal closing for the meeting, ensures
that everyone's had a chance to say something, and gives
you a window into what people are thinking and feeling.
If you find there are lingering issues or conflicts, you can
follow up.

    HINT: It's ideal if the series of weekly meetings ends before
    lunch (like OTG's) or happy hour, so the executives can have
    a more informal setting in which to discuss issues that surface
    during the structured part of the meetings. That informal time                    NP
    is often when real decisions are fleshed out.

    HINT: For those of you who participate in some kind of CEO forum, the weekly meeting is structured
    a lot like a mini-forum meeting, with a formal check-in, updates, forum topic, and one-phrase close


186

---

                                                                          The Meeting Rhythm

Weekly CEO One-Pager
Many CEOs also send out a weekly one-pager to all employees updating them on the status of the
#1 priority and other significant developments inside the company and the industry. Employees
want to hear from their top leader and appreciate the sense of being on the inside provided by this
kind of report.

                The Monthly Management Meeting
     You can tell a great company from a good company by spending just a few minutes inside of the
     business. In good companies, you'll find the senior team stressed out and overworked from the
crush of ever-increasing demands, while the rest of the team seems oblivious to the challenges
facing the firm.
In great companies, you find just the opposite: a senior team that's rested and relaxed while the
balance of the staff is on fire as they work to capitalize on the ever-increasing opportunities facing
the business. We may be exaggerating somewhat, but not by much.
 Unless the senior team instills its DNA— namely, the knowledge and values required to make good
decisions — in everyone from the middle managers on down, the top leaders will find themselves
increasingly overwhelmed by the demands of a growing business.
     Doing this requires one simple routine: a well-structured, one-day monthly management meeting
  that includes everyone who supervises or manages anyone in the business. It should be a day focused
     on learning, sharing, and problem-solving vs. a day of mind-numbing reports. Do anything short
    of hosting this meeting, and the business will ultimately outgrow its middle management. And few
 things are more painful than seeing a business leave loyal people behind.

 Lessons From India
    Nowhere is the need to develop middle management more apparent than in India. And it was a par-
   ticular challenge for Ashiana Housing Ltd., a 480-employee (and 2,500-contractor) New Delhi-based
 firm,one of 39 Indian companies named to the Forbes list of "Asia's 200 Best Under a Billion" in 2010
    and one of 35 in 2011. When Verne first met Managing Director Vishal Gupta and his two brothers,
  who run the construction company founded by their father, they were stressed out over their ever-ex-
    panding company, which had five major projects spread throughout northern India. In turn, their
    middle-management team was relaxed and relatively unaware of the challenges facing the company.

 7% of Management Compensation
   To rectify this problem, we strongly recommended that they initiate a monthly management meeting,
    bringing together all 70 managers from around India for a day of learning and development. Given
                                                                          187

---

Scaling Up

                                               Iu alle iul up
     day each month when all the senior and middle managers could meet. Plus, how could they pullthese
     leaders out of the feld for a day, given the company's growth rate and the crush of work?(Rick Kay
       had the same concern when Verne pushed OTG Software to do the same for its 40 middle managers
spread throughout the US.)
                                               T  ou  os  v
        of management compensation to host a year of one-day monthly meetings, Ashiana Housing ended
     up having to spend 7%. Yet the first few monthly meetings generated tangible results that paid for
the next 10 years of management meetings. Three key outcomes the first year:
Revenue tripled. During the first monthly meeting, the team tackled a huge issue: sales

     wantd to boost business. The challenge wasn't getting traffic to its developments; it wa
     converting visitors into customers.
     After the 70 leaders discussed the issue for several hours, the big idea that emerged was
     creating a wow factor at each of its locations, requiring coordination of the construction and
     maintenance teams. In addition, the team decided to provide customer-service training to
     guards greeting potential customers and to increase the number of signs directing customers
     to the sales and rental offices. All activities could be implemented immediately because the
     entire middle-management team was part of creating the solution.
    The result? Monthly sales tripled by the end of the year and have been high ever since.
Huge time savings. Ashiana hosts a show-and-tell session during these monthly management
    meetings in which teams from both construction and maintenance highlight a best practice
    from the previous month. In one case, the company's new construction team in Pune had

    Immediately, the construction teams at four other locations implemented these best practices.
    Cutting down construction time by a week improves cash flow and speeds sales — a big win
    that provides huge returns from the company's monthly investment.
Breaking down barriers. Pulling all 70 managers together forged stronger relationships
   across functions and business operations. For instance, accounting now understands better
   some of the challenges maintenance faces. In turn, having all 70 together creates positive peer
   pressure, as managers hare heir nuber" at the begining f the meeting Friday eveg.
   Today, 100% of the 70 managers have one key performance indicator that definitively measures
   whether they've had a successful month or not.
   Within the first year, because of the formal and informal training and development that
   occurred during these meetings, the 70 middle managers were able to step up and run the
   day-to-day operations of the business. That leaves the three brothers more time to focus on
   the market-facing activities, like land acquisition, that continue to propel Ashiana Housing
   ahead of its competition.

188

---

                                                                                       The Meeting Rhythm

Four years later (at the time of this book's publication), the monthly meetings are still being held; the
middle managers act as mini-CEOs in running the business; and the three brothers are more relaxed
 than they've ever been and are planning for the future. From a performance standpoint, during this same
period, Ashiana Housing's stock has risen over 250% while direct competitors' stocks have stagnated.
For your reference, here is Ashiana Housing's monthly management meeting agenda

 Ashiana Housing's Meeting Agenda
Friday
6:30 - 8:30 p.m. After a round of good news from the personal and professional fronts, managers
 share "their number." In addition, the owners — the three brothers — review the mission, vision,
 and values and update the team on key targets for the year.
 8:30 p.m. - ? Dinner and drinks give the team some important social time. And the personal good news
 the managers shared earlier fuels a lot of the conversations, creating bonds among the team members.
Saturday
8 a.m. - 10 a.m. All of the managers share their issues from the previous month while the senior
 team looks for patterns and trends. The main benefit, from the owners' perspective, is that this ses-
sion gives the managers a chance to vent and verbalize their challenges. Often, other managers have
 constructive solutions, which are shared later through private conversations.
 10:30 a.m. - 12:30 p.m. After a tea break, the team gets two hours of training. Recent topics have
 included delegation, email etiquette, and executive health. Vishal Gupta, one of the brothers, lost 5
 kilograms (11 pounds) as a result.
 1:30 p.m. - 2 p.m. After lunch, managers make two 15-minute "show-and-tell" presentations, giving
 them practice with their presentation skills and the opportunity to share best practices.
2 p.m. - 5 p.m. The team collectively tackles one or two huge issues, like sales, allowing the senior
 leaders to tap into the ideas of the middle managers and to model their industry knowledge and their
 approach to decision-making. To wrap up the meeting, they share a round of one-phrase closes, in
 which each leader reacts to the management meeting.

 Monthly Town Hall
 In addition to the weekly CEO one-pager, many top leaders also host a monthly town hall meeting,
 at which they make a few key announcements and give employees an opportunity to ask questions
 and discuss issues important to them.
 WARNING: One of the biggest mistakes a CEO can make, in the spirit of transparency and open-
     ness, is to share important changes and information with all the employees before briefing the middl
                                                                                          189

---

Scaling Up

managers and supervisors. Frontline employees, after hearing about a change, will go to their imme
diate supervisor for clarification and details, inquiring, "How is this going to specifically affect me?"
If the managers have not been briefed ahead of time, the CEO has put them in an awkward situation.
They have o choice but torespond, "I don't now I'mhearing this or the first te yself." So
ALL managers first, and create a legion of allies for the changes you want to make

                               Quarterly and Annual Planning Meetings
The main agenda for these one- to three-day offsite planning sessions is to work through and update
                                        GoT.T o e     e qy
 ning sessions. Go to scalingup.com to download a bonus chapter on how to prepare for and organize
these planning meetings.










190

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

SCALING UP
 CASH

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

THE CASH INTRODUCTION

 KEY QUESTION: Do you have consistent sources of cash, ideally generated internally, to fuel the
 growth of your business?

     You can get by with decent People, Strategy, and Execution, but not a day without Cash. Cash becomes
    even more critical as the business scales up, since "growth sucks cash." The key is innovating ways to
   generate sufficient profit and cash flow internally, so you don't have to turn to banks (or sharks!) to
fuel your growth.

Costco Wholesale Corp., the fast-growing warehouse retailer, is a prime example. Co-founder
      Jim Sinegal made a bold move in charging a membership fee for people to shop at his stores. Today,
  those fees account for 75% of Costco's profit ($2.3 billion of the $3 billion in pretax earnings in 2013),
bringing in enough money to finance all new stores.

  Great companies, by choice, keep three to 10 times more cash reserves than their competitors, Jim Collins
     and Morten T. Hansen revealed in their book Great by Choice: Uncertainty, Chaos, and Luck — Why Some
  Thrive Despite Them All. That allows growth firms to weather the storms, and that is why Bill Gates, from
     the very beginning, mandated that Microsoft always keep a year's worth of operating expenses in the
   bank. This is a lesson Gazelles has heeded since running out of cash in the aftermath of 9/11. If you've
 ever experienced the painful reality of not being able to make payroll, you'll never want to face it again.

                         Section Overview

    The first chapter, The Cash, focuses on improving your cash conversion cycle dramatically. It includes
  several practical and creative ideas used by firms to generate sufficient cash internally to fuel growth.

       The second chapter, The Accounting, highlights the underappreciated accounting function of your
    business and outlines how it can better support the organization in generating truer measures of rev-
   enue and profit. Co-written with Greg Crabtree, author of Simple Numbers, Straight Talk, Big Profits! 4
     Keys to Unlock Your Business Potential, the chapter shares some important key performance indicators
 (KPIs), including the insightful labor efficiency ratio, to drive better decision-making and profitability.

         The third chapter, The Power of One, takes you through the case study of a seemingly healthy
      $42 million firm that is "growing broke." Co-authored by Alan Miltz and his team, who created the
   leading software tool for banks to evaluate the financial health of businesses, it walks you through the
    7 financial levers that every business leader can control to scale up cash. "The Power of One" refers
to the benefit to cash flow if a 1% or one-day change is made to each of the 7 levers that affect it.
Two one-page Cash tools will be covered in this section:
 1. Cash Acceleration Strategies (CASh): a place to list specific strategies for increasing cash flow
 2. The Power of One: a way to calculate the impact on cash when making changes to the
 7 financial levers
                                                                                      195

---

 Cash: Cash Acceleration Strategies (CASh)    Gazelles
                                              GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES


 Cash Conversion Cycle (CCC)



 Sales Cycle    Delivery Cycle    Billing & Payment Cycle


  Make/Production                                       Shorten    Improve
  & Inventory Cycle                                Cycle           Eliminate Business
                                                   Times           Mistakes  Model
                                                                             & P/L
  Ways to improve your Sales Cycle

2
3
4
5

  Ways to improve your Make/Production & Inventory Cycle

 2
3
4
5

  Ways to improve your Delivery Cycle
1
2
3
4
5

  Ways to improve your Billing & Payment Cycle

1
2
3
4
5



 Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

    Cash: The Power of One    Gazelles
                              GROWING LEADERS - GROWING COMPANIES


  Your Power of One    Net Cash Flow $    EBIT $

Your Current Position



                                  Change you would  Annual Impact on  Impact on
    Your Power of One             like to make      Cash Flow $       EBIT $

    Price Increase %               %

    Volume Increase %              %

    COGS Reduction %               %

     Overheads Reduction %         %

     Reduction in Debtors Days     day(s)

     Reduction in Stock Days       day(s)

     Increase in Creditors Days    day(s)

     Your Power of One Impact






    Your Power of One     Net Cash Flow $    EBIT $

    Your Adjusted Position





    Download a full-sized copy of this tool at scalingup.com

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

12
THE CASH
Accelerating Cash Flow



           EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Cash is the oxygen that fuels growth. And the cash conversion cycle (CCC)
    is a key performance indicator (KPl) that measures how long it takes for a dollar spent on anything (rent
   utilities, marketing, payroll, etc.) to make its way through your business and back into your pocket. In thi
     chapter, we'll share several ways that companies have dramatically improved their CCC using the one-page
 Cash Acceleration Strategies (CASh) tool, allowing them to fund growth with internally generated cash and
  freeing them from the grasp ofbanks and/or investors. We suggest that you brainstorm ways to improve cash flow
 at each 90-day planning session and pick a related initiative as one of your handful of priorities each quarter.
 Constantly improving the cash flow of the company — and better understanding how cash moves through the
 business — is a powerful driver for improving the firm as a whole.



         he ran out of cash. He was "growing broke," like so many other businesses scaling up quickly.
 That's when he brought in Tom Meredith as CFO. Meredith calculated Dell Inc.'s cash conversion cycle
   (CCC) to be 63 days. That meant it took 63 days from the time Dell spent a dollar on anything until
 it flowed back through the business and onto the balance sheet (into the bank) as cash.
 Focusing on one cash improvement strategy/initiative each 90 days, Meredith drove the CCC to
 negative 21 days by the time he left Dell a decade later. This meant the company received a dollar
 21 days before it had to be spent on anything. As Dell grew faster, it generated cash instead of con-
 suming it. That is why the founder and CEO had sufficient cash to contribute to taking the company
 private in 2013.
 In this chapter, we'll examine strategies for accelerating your cash flow through improvements in
 your CCC.

                                     Cash Conversion Cycle (CCC)
 Not every business can have a negative CCC, but you can view Dell's example as inspiration to move
 yours in that direction. It is just a matter of looking for ways to improve it. For instance, Catapult
      Systems LLC, an Austin-based, Microsoft-focused IT consulting company, used to bill clients on a
      30-day cycle. Meanwhile, employees were paid twice a month, leading to what founder and Chairman
 Sam Goodner calls "a terrible cash-flow story." He simply started billing his clients twice per month,
 after finding more than 90% were agreeable to the change. This nearly doubled cash flow immediately.
                                                                                        199

---

Scaling Up

To tackle the cash conversion cycle, start by reading "How Fast Can Your Company Afford to Grow?"
a Harvard Business Review article by Neil C. Churchill and John W. Mullins. It provides the formulas
to help your team calculate the company's overall CCC and discusses many of the financial levers
highlighted in the last chapter of this "Cash" section of the book

     NOTE: Just as we were going to press, John Mullins published a new book that Verne endorsed,
         titled The Customer-Funded Business: Start, Finance, or Grow Your Company with Your
Customers' Cash. The title says it all! Read it for an advanced look at the cash side of your business
and for ways to get your customers to fund growth, like Costco did.

          Cash Acceleration Strategies (CASh)

To help teams brainstorm ways to improve their cash conversion cycles, we created a one-page tool
called Cash Acceleration Strategies, or CASh. It breaks down the CCC into four main components

          Cash Conversion Cycle (CCC)


   Sales Cycle            Delivery Cycle                               Billing & Payment Cycle

           Make/Production
         & Inventory Cycle

                             Most businesses will have some aspect of each of these cash cycle components. Even service firms
                            have a form of inventory if they have underutilized their staff. What might differ is the sequence
of these components, with some cycles overlapping others or occurring in a different order. For in-
                          stance, if you've structured your business model to collect full payments in advance, like Dell, then
                           the billing and payment cycle occurs after the selling cycle but before the production and delivery
cycle. (In other words, Dell arranged to take ownership of inventory only after a computer was sold.)
                               We encourage management teams to set aside an hour or more each month to brainstorm ways to
                           improve each of these cash cycle components. This is a powerful exercise to do with the broader mid-
                          dle-management team at a half- to full-day monthly management meeting. It will give everyone a better
understanding of how cash flows through the business and how each function can contribute positively.

Some areas of opportunity:
First, stop saying, "Well, this is just the way it is in our industry."
Have your available cash reported DAILY, with a short explanation of why it changed in the last
   24 hours, and chart it against accounts receivable (AR) and accounts payable (AP) weekly. You'll
   learn so much more about your business when you see how the cash is flowing on a daily basis.

200

---

                                                                              The Cash

 If you want to be paid sooner, ask. Small firms are finding that large companies (and govern-
  ments!!) will pay considerably faster or even prepay if they simply ask, ask, ask, ask, and ask
  some more.
 Give value back to customers who pay on time or in advance.
Get your invoices out more quickly. Hire one more person in accounting to do nothing but
  make sure invoicing is timely and follow up on payments.
Send friendly reminders five days before the deadline that payments are due. Many customers
  are disorganized and will appreciate the reminders, resulting in faster payment.
If invoices are recurring, obtain recurring credit card authorization from your customers to
 automate on-time payments.
 Understand why your clients are paying late. They might be unhappy with your product or
 service. Or perhaps an invoice has recurring mistakes, or it is not structured to flow through
  the customer's automated invoicing system.
Understand each customer's payment cycles, and time your billings to coincide.
Pay many of your own expenses with a credit card so you can play the float. Get your own
 customers to pay by credit card, so they can pay you quickly even if their cash flow is slow.
 Help your customers improve their cash flow so they can pay you on time. Offer them leasing
  options, for instance.
 Shorten cycles for delivery of your product or service. All of you have some kind of "work in
 progress." The faster you complete projects, the faster you get paid.
Offer a product or service so valuable that you have some leverage with your customers to
  get them to pay sooner.
Remember, improving margins and profit improves cash.

   NOTE: Have your CFO give you a cash report every day, like Verne's does. The CFO should sum-
   marize the sources and amounts of cash that came in and out of the business during the last 24 hours,
   along with anticipated cash flow for the coming month. It keeps cash top-of-mind and allows you to
   react quickly — within days vs. months — if it's heading in the wrong direction. Observing the sources
   of cash flowing in and out on a daily basis also gives real insight into your business's financial model.

Almost all of these ideas fall into three general categories where you can make improvements:
   1Shorten cycle times.
   2. Eliminate mistakes.
3.Change the business model.

To further stimulate your thinking, here are some ideas in each category that can help you improve
cash flow.



201

---

Scaling Up

Shorten Cycle Times

Increasing the pace of everything your company does (e.g., decreasing the time it takes to com-
plete a full cycle from customer interest to completed transaction) helps your CCC. This is why
we are fans of applying Toyota's Lean process to all aspects of the business. With its focus on
eliminating wasted time, it's an ideal tool to improve processes, increase employee productivity,
and accelerate cash flow.

Pay particular attention to the sales process. You may be expending enormous amounts of money and
time on landing customers. Using negotiation techniques taught by Victoria Medvec (check out her
powerful online "High Stakes Negotiation" course at scalingup.com), firms like Goldman Sachs have
reduced sales cycles from months to weeks and from weeks to days. The quicker you can get a deal
in the door, the quicker the cash starts flowing — and you thwart would-be competitors.
On the production side, back when Dell had factories, a production worker could assemble a computer
in minutes, and the company held only a few days' worth of inventory. This rapid turn of inventory
and the speed of manufacturing contributed hugely to the impressive CCC the company achieved.

Because many accounting departments are short-handed, there are often delays in getting invoices
sent out and bills collected. Besides billing twice per month to improve cash flow, Catapult Systems
collects faster than most firms. Notes Goodner, the chairman: "Our collections person in the account-
ing department works hard to create a personal rapport with our clients' accounts payable teams. She
is the most charming, disarming, nonthreatening, likable person you could possibly have. She starts
calling the accounting departments of our clients five days before the check is due just to make sure
everything is okay, and says that we are doing great on the project. She gives her number just in case
  anything comes up and says, 'I really look forward to getting that check from you next week.'" And
if the check is late, the Catapult Systems' collections specialist places a call to the client the next day.
That is another reason to bolster your accounting department resources.
Goodner credits this approach with his company's "unbelievably high" track record of getting paid
on time — simply because, he says, "We ask for it."

 Meanwhile, a firm in Australia sends inexpensive lottery tickets as thank-yous to its customers' ac-
 counts payable clerks when they pay invoices on time. When customers are faced with a stack of bills
to pay, this company's invoices seem to magically make it to the top of the pile! And if this might
 be frowned upon (or deemed illegal) in your industry or locale, a holiday card showing appreciation
   to the people in accounts payable can achieve the same effect. The point is to have someone pay
attention to the accounts payable people!

Also specify a due date (May 31, for example) on the invoice rather than include the standard "due
in 30 days." Often, someone higher up in the client organization has to sign off on an invoice before
it can be paid, with the 30-day clock starting when this signature is received. If there is a specific
due date, even if the signature isn't obtained until the day before, the payables clerk will assume that
the sign-off authorizes the payment to occur on the date specified, and will pay the bill immediately.

202

---

                                                                 The Cash

Examine all of the processes in the organization — sales, production, service delivery, billing, and
collections — and find ways to speed up and move cash more quickly through the business.

Eliminate Mistakes
       Nothing infuriates customers more than a mistake. It is the #1 reason they are slow to pay. And
     incomplete orders, invoicing errors, and missed deadlines are not only costly but also drag down the
very processes you want to speed up, snarling cash flow.
         Adam Sproule, founder of Salisbury Landscaping in Alberta, has the company's cash conversion
      cycle down to a fine art. The approach he has used has helped him optimize the CCC for the past 20
years. Besides securing deposits up front (with the final payment due immediately upon a project's
      completion), Salisbury Landscaping has put operating practices in place to finish jobs quickly and
  in a far less disruptive way than clients usually see in its industry. This, in turn, has given Salisbury
 a reputation that makes collecting deposits and payments easier.
    Tradespeople in landscaping or construction usually work on two to three jobs at the same time, often
     leaving customers wondering what's happening and why the projects aren't finished yet. "It's a real

u  We    n ,
                                        S y. "Not     n  weo, u e e e
  more likely there will be problems.
        As soon as the crew leaves, a member of Sproule's team walks around with the customer to make
   sure the job is absolutely perfect. "Even if there are just a couple deficiencies, we write them down,"
      sa Sproule, who notes that his staff refers to corrections of deficiencies as "djustments,"to vod
 any negative perception.
      "We then make an adjustment list. Because we're very efficient at what we do, the customer has no
    reason to doubt us. So a lot of times, they give us the full payment immediately after the walk-around
    even if there are a few things left to do," notes Sproule. And to close the loop of learning and avoid
  making the same mistakes on subsequent projects, Salisbury sends out the same crew that generated
  the deficiencies to handle the adjustments quickly.
         PPR Talent Management Group freed up a million dollars every month through improved accuracy
  in its invoicing. Serving the needs of a thousand clients — mostly hospitals, all with different policies
     and time-sheet protocols — caused considerable complexity in invoicing. As a result, clients delayed
                                               p i r ut e s  y
     hired an additional person not only to build relationships with the payables departments but also to
        customize invoices to match each specific hospital's billing codes. As CEO Dwight Cooper notes
      When we changed our process and got it right, the confidence level with our clients came up fast."
      Then the latest recession came. As it dragged on into 2009, Cooper says, "We took our eye off the
  cash ball." It was time to change the entire business model — at least from a cash perspective.
                                                                                                 203

---

 Scaling Up

 Change the Business Model

 For PPR, collections were not the problem; it was creating the right terms to begin with. To grow the
 business, PPR needed cash, so it asked customers to pay in advance. "We were pleasantly surprised
 when many of our customers just said yes," says Cooper.
 There are many adjustments you can make to your business model that positively affect your CCC.
The two with the biggest results are getting your customers to fund your business, much like Costco
 does via membership fees, or having suppliers do this, as Dell did through its inventory management.
 For sources of cash other than loans or investors, we refer you to a Fortune Small Business article
 Verne wrote titled "Finding Money You Didn't Know You Had": http://tiny.cc/finding-money

 Improving Profitability

     Benetton India also felt the crunch of the economic downturn in 2009, so it embarked on a major
    cost-saving initiative. Sanjeev Mohanty, CEO of Benetton India Private Ltd., got vendors to bid
   online for contracts using business-commerce software purchased from Ariba. "Initially, everyone was
   very skeptical, saying that we would lose quality," he says. Plus, some suppliers had been providing
    goods to Benetton India for more than a decade, and executives hesitated to disrupt what appeared
to be working well.

 Mohanty persisted, and the savings have been significant. For instance, Benetton India invited six
  different suppliers, including the incumbent, to bid on its contract for shopping bags. Suppliers can
 use Ariba not only to place their bids, but also to see what other companies are bidding. Normally, the
  whole bidding process can take several hours, but this round closed in 32 minutes, while the executive
     team watched in real time. Benetton previously paid 52 cents per shopping bag, and the final bid
    came in at 34 cents — a huge savings. Surprisingly, the incumbent supplier provided the final low
   bid, so in addition to benefiting from the savings, Benetton India maintained the same-quality bag.
Today, company employees must use Ariba to procure any goods or services with a value of more than
$10,000. In one recent year, Benetton India saved $1.2 million through this procurement process.
    Again, when you improve profitability, it improves cash — as long as you're not funding management
 waste on the balance sheet, as we'll discuss further in the next two chapters. And for retail companies
    like MOM's Organic Market and Benetton India, which collect cash or credit card payments for every
transaction, the only real internal financial cash lever is on the P&L side of the business.

     During the recent financial crisis, fearing credit lines might dry up, MOM's CEO Scott Nash and
his team stayed laser-focused on improving profitability (emphasizing pricing, purchasing, etc.).
    Today, with four times industry average profitability, the metro Washington-based chain has driven
   up its free operating cash flow to fund its continued expansion. At Catapult Systems, Goodner finds
    cost savings by sitting down with an accounts payable employee every six months to scrutinize what
     the company is paying for goods and services. Understanding the expenses, one-time charges, and
   recurring charges leads to savings opportunities that add up. "There's probably tens of thousands of
204

---

                                                                          The Cash

      dollars a year I cancut, and the copany det eel the diffeence," Gooder ys. For exple
                                           wh  $00
                        dec  purhas cercil ratitste, or ent  the st. Re
                                              l   G
I stil pernally pprove beore it et ccd."

                    Completing Your Cash Acceleration Strategies (CASh) Tool
    Read the Harvard Business Review article by Neil C. Churchill and John W. Mullins titled
   "How Fast Can Your Company Afford to Grow?"
 Calculate your existing CCC in days.
 Calculate the amount of cash required to fund each additional day of CCC.
 Brainstorm ways to improve your CCC and the 7 financial levers highlighted in the last
           p
    threegeneral categories — shortening cycle times, eliminating mistakes, and changing the
    business model — for each segment of the CCC.
 Choose one cash-improvement initiative every 90 days as one of your quarterly pririties
   (Rocks).
Imagine you improve your CCC by 30 days (and you run a $30 million business). You now have $2.5
million extra in your bank account, and you can:
  Pay down your operating credit line.
  Distribute a dividend to shareholders.
  Invest in a new project that will support your growth plans.
   .Sit on it until you find the perfect opportunity.
   5.Keep it as insurance for when times get rough.
    The best part about improving your CCC is that it usually results in your business pulsing faster
      which i better for the customer. It wil lso improve the business savy o your managers as they
     become more aware of the impact of their decisions on cash flow. And with more cash in the bank

free and give you sticking power in the market.





205

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

    13
    THE ACCOUNTING
    Driving Profitability



          EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Greg Crabtree's highly readable book, Simple Numbers, Straight Talk,
Big Profits! 4 Keys to Unlock Your Business Potential, pioneered new territory for growth firms. It strikes
  a nerve with CEOs, showing that accountants are not giving them the data they really need to make better
 decisions. Crabtree's book makes the case that somewhere along the way, accountants became mere processors
of data, losing the ability to communicate this information clearly and simply. We invited Crabtree, CEO of
Crabtree, Rowe & Berger PC, to co-author this chapter in order to share some of his wisdom and insight into
    how accounting can help leaders anticipate problems, grow a business profitably, and drive valuation.


        certain service business, clawing its way to $5 million in revenue during 14 tough years, was barely
               turning a profit or providing a reasonable wage to the owner. Greg Crabtree's accounting team
    stepped in, using his Simple Numbers approach to help the owner see his business in a different light
    They made the key top line gross margin, not revenue. The service firm adjusted the owner's pay to a
    real market wage so that profits would not be overstated. And Crabtree's team introduced techniques
    for tracking labor efficiency, helping the owner align his labor costs immediately with business cycles.
    The net result: Crabtree's client grew to $25 million in the next five years and hit 10% profit, after
    paying the owner a competitive salary. Yes, there were significant taxes to pay, but that's because
    the company was now generating real after-tax wealth that helped both the business and its owner
    become debt-free and flush with cash.
    In this chapter, we'll explore the various tools and methodologies that Crabtree and his team used
    to help this company and hundreds of others improve profitability dramatically. The process starts
    with valuing a strong accounting function in a business.

    Accounting: Underappreciated
    If the #1 weakness of growth firms is marketing, the #2 problem is ac-      "The #2 weakness
    counting. Accounting is often underappreciated. It is seen as a necessary   of growth firms is
    evil to keep the tax collectors at bay; invoice, collect, and pay bills; and
    provide monthly accounting statements — which often receive at most         accounting."
    a cursory glance at the bottom line of the P&L.


    207

---

  Scaling Up

  Accounting is often underfunded as a result. Most entrepreneurs, if they have an extra dollar of profit
    ak  lT   yH
 we've seen profits and cash double within a year when businesspeople also devote just a little more
 attention and resources to accounting (remember, John D. Rockefeller was an accountant by train-
 ing). Hiring just one additional person to either support the CFO or carry some of this executive's
 workload enables him or her to provide the following:
    1.Better cash and cash-flow management
    Waterfall graphs, which we will explain shortly, to share more granular accounting data
        for better decision-making
   3Trend analysis and early-warning systems to support better prediction
   4.Two sets of books — for the right reasons!

Waterfall Graphs

A key accounting activityis to slice and dice a company's financial data as granularly as possible. This
l e eerh tem v e os margi, pro,n csh fow by cto  dv
customer, location, product line, alesperson, etc. Accountants do this by creating a series of waterfal
graphs (see the diagram below).

  25
  20
  15
  10
   5
   0
  -5    1    2                 3  4                   5  6               7
   -10
   -15
   -20
   -25

        NOTE: The vertical axis might measure gross margin or profit percentage, while the horizontal axis
        might enumerate specific customers, locations, salespeople, product lines, or SKUs


208

---

                                                                     The Accounting

 The leadership team soon discovers from these waterfall graphs that the company is making a bunch
 of money from a limited part of the business and losing some or a lot in other parts, resulting in a
gross margin or profitability that is mediocre. It's the less profitable parts of the business that tend
 to suck up most of management's time and attention. Turnaround
 specialists like Greg Brenneman, the Houston-based chairman of      "What is strategic about
    private equity firm TurnWorks Inc., rely on this kind of data to  losing lots of money?"
 eliminate consistently unprofitable routes, as he did at Continental
  Airlines, and menu items, as he did at the Quiznos restaurant chain.

 So why do we continue to hold on to these losers? "For strategic reasons" is the excuse! Yet what is
 strategic about losing lots of money over a long period of time? Apple could have easily argued that
 selling its money-losing handheld computers was a strategic move, but Steve Jobs eliminated the
 product line when he came back to run the firm a second time. Any loss leaders you might need — and
 these should be kept to a minimum — should be treated as a marketing expense in your accounting.
 For more insight into this common strategic mistake, read Brenneman's Harvard Business Review case
 study on the turnaround of Continental Airlines.

 Trend Analysis

A fundamental responsibility of leaders is prediction, and they need both frequent quantitative data
and qualitative feedback from the market to make the right calls. As we've mentioned, any data more
than a week old is history and is not useful for making the fast decisions necessitated by our highly
connected global economy.

The accounting function is critical in this regard. It should provide the kinds of reports and graphs
 that help the leadership team see into the near future. For example, we helped the CFO of a dis-
 tributor of electrical supplies to set up a series of weekly bar charts (rather than eye-straining Excel
spreadsheets) that monitored major customers' purchases of various product lines. Sales to these
accounts constituted 80% of the firm's revenue. After a few months, the company could see that one
of the customers was slowly reducing its relative order size. That was an early warning that something
was amiss and alerted the account manager to follow up more quickly than normal. The company was
 also quicker to notice and act on other trends, like the change in popularity of certain product lines,
 now that leaders were seeing this visual data weekly, rather than monthly or quarterly.

  Microsoft MapPoint
  Where are all the maps with pushpins you used to see populating sales and marketing offices -
  and the offices of CEOs? We wish companies used them more. Seeing data mapped out this
      way helps you visualize patterns you wouldn't otherwise discern. For instance, we mapped a
  database of gazelles against cities where we have coaching partners and could immediately see
  where we had gaps in our coverage.
  Barrett Ersek used a series of maps and Microsoft's powerful MapPoint software to see patterns
  in where he was making sales (based on close ratios) and getting callbacks within his lawn care

                                                                                            209

---

 Scaling Up

    business. He also mapped the customer locations of his potential acquisition targets, which he
   overlaid on maps of his existing client locations to give him a better idea of an acquisition's
    value. For example, did a target company's customers live in certain neighborhoods that would
   enable him to route his equipment more efficiently?
     See how many Excel spreadsheets you can replace with MapPoint maps. Check out a demo of this
     inexpensive software at microsoft.com/mappoint, and encourage your accounting team to create
   more maps. Note: Bing Maps will be replacing MapPoint as of Jan. 1, 2015.

 Two Sets of Books
      One set of accounting books is needed to satisfy the rules of the Financial Accounting Standards
       Board (FASB) and the tax authorities. However, rarely should you make business decisions based
      solely on these regulations. For instance, computer hardware and software can be amortized over
       several years for tax purposes. However, Michael Dell wanted business units to implement only
   solutions that had a quick payoff. So, for internal purposes, Dell treated all technology costs as an
 expense against a division's P&L within 12 months.
    For more on this topic, we encourage all CFOs to read Thomas A. Stewart's classic book Intellectual
    Capital: The New Wealth of Organizations. Pay particular attention to the extensive appendix, where
    he suggests specific accounting rules that better align with an information-based economy than with
 a manufacturing-type economy, which generated many of the FASB rules we follow today. For ex-
      ample, whereas you can amortize software over several years, you must expense employee training
     and development in the quarter in which it's provided. Stewart argues strongly that if any expense
     could legitimately be amortized over a longer period of time, it is education. The ideas your team
 learns today will continue to have an impact for many years.
       The key is to decide on the practices and rules by which you want the company to run, and have
   accounting align your internal books in support. Use Stewart's book as your guide to grow a 21st-cen-
 tury-focused organization.

 Simple Numbers
 Gr Crabtree hadalways lt like a mis in accounting, given his concerns for the professn, s
he began a journey to bring simplicity, clarity, and power to the numbers. This led to the Simple
Numbers process, discussed in his book by the same name. His approach focuses on four keys to
running a wealth-building business:
  Clear the distortions.
  2.Set appropriate profit targets.
  Use labor efficiency to drive profitability
  4Understand the 4 Forces of Cash Flow

210

---

                                                                   The Accounting

We'll look at the first three items in more detail than the last, since Crabtree's views on cash align
with Alan Miltz's approach, covered in the next chapter.

                     Clear the Distortions
   If a company generates less than $20 million a year in revenue, then compensation and distributions
     to the owners can distort the true picture of profitability. That happened at the company in the
    example that opened this chapter. (For the benefit of employees reading this book: Owners usually
    pay themselves much less than you might imagine, especially in the early days, preferring to plow
 the profits back into their businesses.)
   An excellent example of this distortion was a client that had two 50/50 owners. When Crabtree first
  looked at their books, they were boasting about 25% profitability. However, once he reclassified dis-
    tributions to account for an equivalent market wage for the owners, their true profit was 3%! What
     happened next is the mind shit Crabtree likes to see. The owners bought into this more accurate
way of calculating profitability, and the next year, they made their market-based wages AND 20%
 profit — a scenario that we've seen over and over.

 Gross Margin Dollars
   The next major accounting distortion is centered around revenue. Revenue is vanity (and the weakest
    number) when it comes to your P&L. Focus instead on a redefined version of gross margin. Crabtree
calculates gross margin to be revenue minus all NONLABOR direct costs. This definition of gross
 margin gives you the true economic top line of the business.
  Understanding this is especially important for businesses that utilize subcontractors, have high mate-
 rials costs, or operate as distributors with low margins. There is no way that a $4 million distributor
    that gets a 10% commission on al its sales or a custom home builder with high costs for materials
    and subcontractors compares to a $4 million service firm. In essence, nonlabor direct costs, which
   are paid out of revenue, are simply pass-throughs. You definitely want to get them at the best price
    but you usually cannot move the price enough to make up for any profit deficiency in your business
     model. The same holds true at employment agencies and professional employee organizations, where
 revenue is the total payroll that passes through the organization. The net dollars they have to operate
 their businesses are a fraction of this amount.
    In the service-company example we discussed earlier, gross margin dollars became the new top-line
  focus, instead of revenue. That guided the business to seek opportunities that resulted in the highest
 gross margin per labor dollar. This was a key step in going from breakeven to 10% profitability.
    Instead of obsessing about revenue, shift the internal discussions to generating gross margin, the
   real top line of the business. (Talk about revenue with outsiders if you want.) And note: The focus
 is more on gross margin dollars than gross margin as a percentage.

                                                                                                 211

---

Scaling Up

 The Power of Gross Margin
    Gross margin doesn't get enough respect. It's bad enough that it's stuck in the middle of the
   P&L and often gets glossed over. It's actually THE most powerful indicator of an effective sales
     team, a differentiated strategy, and real growth. As a company scales up, the market demands
   better pricing (e.g., your largest customers now ask for discounts). When this is combined with
   the complexities and increasing costs that come with being a larger company, we often see gross
      margins shrink by 3% to 4% - from, say, 55.4% to 51.8%. At the $10 million or $100 million
   level, such a dip results in $300,000 to $3 million becoming unavailable to fund infrastructure,
 pay a key executive, or fuel profitability.
     There are two options to improve your gross margins. The first is to refine your strategy to
    maintain enough differentiation and uniqueness in your offering that you can hold your line on
    pricing (see "The 7 Strata of Strategy" chapter). This requires both salespeople who can sell
     this differentiation and a marketing function that keeps them armed and focused on the right
    customers. In these cases, you can actually see gross margins increase a few percentage points
 with growth. This is why hyperspecialization is powerful.
    Of course, there are some markets that are just brutal — especially for lower-margin products
     and services. In these cases, if you get too focused on the gross margin percentage, you may
     miss an opportunity to grow, and your only option is to simply drive up overall gross margin
  dollars. That last gross margin dollar shouldn't cost you as much as the first one, so bring in as
 much cash as you can, factoring in how you might have to ramp up fixed costs.
 If the market tells you the price that customers are willing to pay, you have to make your costs
  il tr T la si.

   WARNING: Since gross margin dollars more accurately measure sales performance, you should
   never base sales compensation on revenue unless your cost of goods sold does not vary from sale to sale.
   You will be paying commissions on revenue while allowing your salespeople to set the price!

          Set Appropriate Profit Targets
Now that we have cleared the two major distortions, we can set a true profit target. The first decision
 is whether to define profit as a percentage of revenue or gross margin. As a general rule, once your
 gross margin percentage gets below 40% you should relate profit to gross margin, so you can generate
an apples-to-apples comparison with other industries. Lower-margin businesses must sell a signifi-
cant volume of other people's products and services to succeed. For example, a $20 million general
contractor might average a 2.5% profit as a percentage of revenue (which is good for a company in its
industry), given all the pass-through costs we mentioned above, yet the ratio of profit to gross margin
would be 18%. The reason businesses like this can survive on what appears to be a low profit margin
relative to revenue is that they typically do not have to fund direct material and subcontractor costs
passing through the business. Instead, they can take a draw against each project to pay for materials,
and they generally do not pay their subcontractors until they get paid themselves.
212

---

                                                                           The Accounting

With this adjustment in how profit percentage is defined (i.e., relative to gross margin vs. revenue,
depending on industry) and with distortions eliminated, comparing businesses from different in-
dustries gets easier. Here's what Crabtree's CPA firm finds:
 At 5% pretax profit, your business is on life support.     At 15% pretax profit, a
 At 10% pretax profit, the business is doing well but has   business is in great shape."
 some untapped potential.
 At 15% pretax profit, the business is in great shape.
 Anything above 15% indicates that you should earn it while you can. The market will figure
  out what's going on, competition will show up, and you will eventually get pushed back.
Yes, there are always exceptions, but not as many as you may think if you make the adjustments above
and see your relative profitability in this new way.

  Use Labor Efficiency to Drive Profitability
Now we can get to the #1 driver of profitability — labor efficiency — a measure of the productivity
of each dollar we spend on labor. Notice that we do not discuss total labor costs, but rather the pro-
ductivity of a dollar of labor. Instead of seeing labor costs as a percentage of something (revenue,
ro margi  e wan  vi abor  ig you n veo t ee  e
multiplier (e.g., for every $1 you spend on labor, you get $3 back). The theory is that as long as you
can keep applying productive labor (be it salespeople, programmers, or call center reps) at the right
multiple, the only bottleneck is lacking enough of the right people to keep growing.
The key is to know the right multiple for each of the three major segments of labor demonstrated in
the exhibit below. The three segments of labor efficiency we want you to focus on are:
 Direct labor efficiency: gross margin dollars divided by direct labor cost
 Sales labor efficiency: contribution margin dollars divided by sales labor cost
 •Management labor efficiency: contribution margin dollars divided by management labor cost
A few points that address some common questions:
 Contribution margin is defined as gross margin minus direct labor. This is what most
  accountants refer to as gross profit, but it mixes labor costs with nonlabor costs and masks
  the productivity of labor.
 Here's how to decide which workers go into each bucket: Start with direct labor, determining
  which employees spend 50% or more of their time delivering on the product or service your
  business offers. All other labor goes into management labor. If you have a sales team, as in
  the example below, break out those employees separately.
 Avoid splitting a person across multiple groups.
 Do not add payroll taxes and benefits. Only count what you pay employees in wages and
  bonuses, to keep the calculation simple

                                                                                         213

---

Scaling Up

   Here's why contribution margin is used for management and sales labor: Workers you
   classify as direct labor are accountable only for the work you put in front of them; that is
   why they are measured against gross margin. But management and sales labor are held to a
   higher standard. We want management to manage gross margins, direct labor performance
   and sales. We want the sales team to grow our revenue.
        In the company case study below, we show how a firm can grow profitably. Our pet peeve is when
                     a company's leaders think it should grow regardless of profit. This is just reckless, unless you're a
                        venture-backed firm pioneering new territory. For everyone else, we recommend getting profitable
                         with the work you have, proving you can get to 15% profitability (based on our adjusted Simple
                       Numbers), adding labor to knock profit back to 10%, and then growing to 15% again. Lather, rinse,
and repeat.

Labor Efficiency Ratio (LER) Example
                        Let's look at a company generating $450,000 per month in revenue, with a profit of 4.4% (see the
     financials on Page 215). The owners are considering an eventual sale, but right now, the business
                      is on life support, given our definition of healthy profits. Our prescription was to hold all costs
                         constant until the business reached $492,195 in revenue per month. Notice we said to hold the
                        costs constant, but we did not say that the company could not replace individual employees. The
                         company was spending the right amount of money for each segment of labor, but it did not have
                        the right team members in the right place. The solution is simple in principle, but implementing
   it is hard: The leaders had to get honest with the team about their productivity, resulting in some
tough conversations.
It is amazing how many companies respond to this simple targeting mechanism once they try it
                     First, get to 10% profitability; then look around and see who is tired or frustrated. There is a good
                      chance you won't find anyone, because your employees will be energized by hitting a key goal. Reset
your course, and keep going until you hit 15% profitability.
Once you get to 15% profit the first time, you can then add labor dollars across the categories, based
on where you see stress — and there will be some initially. Adding dollars means covering raises or
bonuses, or adding new people. Labor efficiency does not care how you spend your money, whether
on more people or raises. Just keep the same rate of labor productivity
Limit the amount of labor added so you don't drop back below 10% profit. This is why we say "10%
is the new breakeven." Once you add the new labor and profitability drops, hold labor costs steady
and grow back to 15% profit. Keep repeating the cycle.

 "10% is the new     When you start seeing how the LERs change at each level of profitability,
                     you begin developing a unique perspective on how your business model
 breakeven."         operates. You know when you are running hot and need to add people and
                     when you are overstaffed and need to make other adjustments.

214

---

                                                                                      The Accounting

In our company case study, here is how the leaders' efforts played out:
• Direct LER: There was an LER of about 4.25 each time that profit reached 15%. Direct LER
  is typically the first to stabilize and move into a tighter range.
•Sales LER: When the company hit 15% profitability the first time, sales LER went to 8.29;
    the ratio settled back to 7.38 the next time profitability reached 15%. The discussion with
    the sales team revolved around whether to add more salespeople or pay incentives when the
  company got back to 8.29. The sales team tried to sell management on doing both sooner,
  but we coached the leadership team to hold out until sales LER returned to 8.29.
   Management LER: The team needs to be careful about adding management cost to the
   business, making sure each additional leader contributes to management productivity (i.e..
   helps increase contribution margin dollars).

    NOTE: The typical frustrated entrepreneur wants to fill every role as soon as possible. However, unles
    you have sufficient capital to cover the losses until sales catch up with salaries, this is a deadly move.
          Taking it slow is especially critical when adding highly paid senior leaders to the team. Add one key role
            at a time. Get profitable with that executive before you add the next one or add support personnel. Once
    you've scaled up the business sufficiently to have a full leadership team, management LER really starts
    to improve as revenue grows. You need only add supporting staff at this point.

                                                            Step #1    Step #2              Step #3          Step #4
                                          Original     10%              15%             back to 10%      back to 15%
                                    monthly profit    profitability    profitability  profitability    profitability
Revenue                                    450,000     492,195          534,383             534,383          587,822

Direct costs excluding labor               130,000          142,195    154,383              154,383          169,822
Gross margin dollars                       320,000     350,000         380,000              380,000          418,000
Gross profit                                 71.1%            71.1%      71.1%                71.1%            71.1%
Direct labor costs                          90,000     90,000           90,000        98,333                  98,333

Contribution margin                        230,000          260,000    290,000        281,667          319,667

Management labor costs                      75,000     75,000           75,000               83,333           83,333
Sales labor costs                           35,000           35,000     35,000               43,333           43,333
Other operating costs                      100,000          100,000    100,000              101,667    105,000

Pretax profit                               20,000           50,000     80,000               53,333           88,000

Pretax profit as % of revenue                4.44%           10.16%     14.97%                9.98%    14.97%
Contribution margin as % of revenue         51.11%           52.82%      54.27%              52.71%    54.38%

Other operating costs as % of revenue    22.22%         20.32%           18.71%       19.03%           17.86%
Labor efficiency ratios:
 Direct labor (GM/DLC)                   $3.56                $3.89     $4.22                 $3.86    $4.25
 Sales labor (CM/SLC)                    $6.57                $7.43     $8.29                 $6.50            $7.38
 Management labor (CM/MLC)               $3.07                $3.47     $3.87                 $3.38            $3.84

                                                                                                       215

---

 Scaling Up

 In this case, leaders were able to isolate certain labor groups that could be held accountable for spe-
 cific line items that make up the total gross margin. Whenever there was a downturn, the company
 trimmed the team members who were not as productive, or allowed some of their productive full-time
 staff to drop back to four days a week. Don't underestimate how many of your employees would like
to cut back to four days a week. Starbucks considers its employees full-time at 30 hours per week,
but will expand workers' time up to 40 hours to meet scheduling needs. This gives the company
 20% labor flexibility at no overtime premium. Meanwhile, Starbucks employees generally rank their
 employer as a top place to work.

                  Understand the 4 Forces of Cash Flow

 Once a company is on the road to 15% profitability, as defined by the Simple Numbers formula, it
faces additional cash-flow challenges. We say "additional" because whenever management tells us
there's a cash-flow problem, we always start with fixing profitability, unless the company is broke
 and needs an immediate cash infusion to make payroll.
As we mentioned in the last chapter, you can improve cash flow by negotiating favorable terms
with customers and vendors. However, we recommend sacrificing your margin with special deals
 only if you're desperate.

Force #1: Taxes
Know how much you owe in taxes throughout the year to avoid the annual tax day surprise. And resist
the temptation to spend $1 in order to save 40 cents in taxes by rationalizing, "Hey, the government
pays for 40% of the cost of the computer [or whatever the company is buying], anyway." Crabtree
believes that rather than chasing the very limited tax-saving maneuvers available, CPAs would better
serve business owners if they would emphasize that true wealth is created only with after-tax profits.
If you do not pay any taxes, you either have not created any wealth or you have cheated, and both
scenarios are bad.

Let's return to the service firm that grew to $25 million in revenue. Crabtree made sure that it set
aside enough cash for taxes each quarter, so the management team did not get blindsided by the
tax day surprise.

Force #2: Manage Debt
Debt is generally not your friend. If not managed properly, debt will enslave your business and keep it
from reaching its full potential. Once you have set aside your tax money, eliminate debt on your line
of credit and remain current on any term loans. Lines of credit are like crack cocaine for businesses
because it's too easy to draw on them to solve cash-flow issues, rather than make the hard decisions
that lead to improved profitability

216

---

                                                                     The Accounting

If you need a line of credit to handle seasonal ups and downs or
to extend your customers' credit, we recommend that you borrow       "Debt is generally
on it only when you are profitable. If you are losing money, do not  not your friend."
 draw on it before you fix the underlying problems. Banks know
 that a company losing money will eventually have no funds to
 repay the line of credit.
    Term debt can help you spread the cost of long-term assets over their useful life. However, if you have
  "termed out" your line of credit, pay off this debt as quickly as possible if it does not support any long-
   term functional asset. And avoid falling for the trap of using debt to buy an asset at year's end just to
   save on taxes. This ends badly over the long run, unless the asset is critical to improving profitability.

 Force #3: Core Capital Target
         Meeting your core capital target means having two months of operating expenses in cash, after
          you have set aside money to pay your taxes and assuming that you have nothing drawn on your
       line of credit. In our opinion, any company that can meet this criterion is considered fully capi-
      talized and can start harvesting profits for either further growth opportunities or distribution to
      shareholders for wealth diversification. If business owners harvest profits before debt is cleared,
       they risk putting the business into an undercapitalized situation. This is a problem that plagues
 many growth companies.
       The definition of two months of operating expenses includes all normal operating expenses on which
       you do not get terms. As a rule, the only costs you exclude will be your cost of goods sold, since
 businesses typically get terms of 30+ days.
     Hitting the core capital target is one of the most rewarding accomplishments we have seen our clients
    achieve. It changes their thinking. It improves their profitability. They are not so cash-strapped that
      they have to give away margin. It also gives them staying power through a bad quarter. Most of them
 never want to see line-of-credit debt again.
       In the case study, the company originally bringing in $450,000 a month went from looking at a line
       of credit as its cushion to having three months of operating expenses in cash on hand. The owners
 were surprised that it took only 18 months to get there once they fixed their profitability

  Force #4: Harvest Profits by Paying Dividends
     Once you have set aside taxes, paid off your line of credit, and met your core capital target, you can
       safely take your after-tax profits in the form of a distribution or bonuses to employees. You have
       now created a profitable, cash-flow-generating business — the best of both worlds. The company is
       more valuable than less profitable peers. You own a wonderful, high-performing asset that you may
  want to consider holding on to rather than selling.

                                                                                            217

---

 Scaling Up

  Here is the often-overlooked nugget in all of this: If you run a business at 10% profit that has hit
  its core capital target, you now have a business that is producing a MINIMUM return on equity of
 50% PER YEAR! Investors would kill for a rate of return of 20% year after year, and yours is run-
 ning somewhere between 50% and 100% per year. This is the true secret of building wealth within
  a privately held business.
 In the case study, the owners went from thinking about selling the business once it hit a certain size
to wanting to keep it, since it generated a great annual return on investment and had great value.
You need a nice premium on a sale to replace an asset that's earning 50%+ per year.
Kee it ip, kee owg, nd grow proably is Crabre's motto! We couldt agree mor. The
key is getting a better handle on a few crucial ratios and adjusting your numbers to get a better pic-
ture of your true profitability. Let's next take a more thorough look at the cash side of the business.










218

---

    14
      THE POWER OF ONE
7 Key Financial Levers



         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: The income statement often receives more attention than the cash flow state-
  ment. By giving the cash flow statement just a little more consideration, and tweaking 7 key financial levers
  outlined at the end of the chapter, a company can grow considerably faster using its own internally generated
     cash than by raising or borrowing external capital. Co-authored with the team at Cash Flow Story — Alan
      Miltz, Joss Milner, and Nathan Keating — this chapter looks at a seemingly healthy $42 million company
 headed for a cash disaster and the steps it was able to take to reverse its situation. You will learn how to use
   what Miltz's team in Australia calls "The Power of One" to develop a better understanding of how to improve
cash flow and actively develop a cash-flow culture within your business. "The Power of One" refers to the benefit
 to cash flow if a 1% or one-day change is made to each of the 7 levers that affect it. Miltz and his colleagues
    created an inexpensive online software tool — www.cashflowstory.com — to do all the powerful calculations
    that show your team how to double operating cash flow and sleep better at night. Nothing ages a company's
    leadership faster than being short of cash!
    HINT: If you really don't like numbers, read the first few pages of the chapter, and then jump to the
    end and read the section called "The Power of One and the 7 Levers" starting on Page 231.


                stablished in 2001, Gary's Furniture imports and manufactures high-end furniture. Over nearly
    E
               15 years of operation, the business has grown from a start-up to a well-established firm, with
    revenue of $42 million. Its customer base continues to grow, as does its geographical reach. The busi-
    ness has grown profits for the last 10 years. Gary is a member of a local CEO forum group. When
    asked by the group to score his satisfaction with his business performance, he consistently scores his
    business 10 out of 10!
    Gary had no concerns when his bank called a meeting one day at its head office, shortly after
    he submitted his recent financials. But what Gary didn't know was that he was "growing broke."
    (Read that again!)

    Profit vs. Cash
    What is more important, profit or cash? If you're a growing business, it's cash. This is why Amazon
    has continued to thrive while at near breakeven or, frequently, while posting losses. Amazon's business
    model generates significant cash — more than $3 billion in 2013 — which, in turn, fuels its rapid growth.

                          219

---

 Scaling Up

       The following case study shows how a healthy profit and loss statement can mask pending cash-flow
    issues that will only get worse as the business continues to scale. Gary didn't know it, but he was out-
      growing his ability to fund the business — growing broke — because he didn't understand the supreme
  importance of cash. In such a situation, unless you continue to raise
  emotional money (that is, cash from people who love you), the smart  "Gary didn't know he
  money will flee, which only speeds up the demise of the business.    was growing broke.'"

  It's imperative that you understand your business from the per-
     spective of bankers and investors, so you're not frustrated by their apparent lack of appreciation for
       the company you're scaling up. Miltz and his team built software that banks all over the world use
      to analyze the creditworthiness of a business, then decided to put these same tools in the hands of
      business leaders. Hang in there through this case study, and you'll learn the 7 levers you can tweak
  to improve cash flow dramatically and sleep better at night.

 The Dreaded "Hospital Division"

      When we left off, Gary was heading to the bank. He could just as easily have been going to a meeting
       with an angel investor, a private equity firm, or a potential acquirer who would be looking at the
 business through the same financial lens that Gary's bankers used

        When Gary was ushered into the meeting room, in front of him were not only his relationship man-
      ager and her assistant, but also the district manager and two other gentlemen dressed in suits. Gary
 was introduced to the two new parties, who were from the bank's Special Credit Division.

       The duo explained to Gary that their division was charged with managing clients deemed by the bank
      to be high-risk. Every bank has a group like this. It may go by different descriptions, depending on
   the bank, among them "asset management," "credit restructuring," and "special business services."
We call it the Hospital Division.

        These men have the hardest job in the bank. They are responsible for determining rapidly whether
   a client is providing the best return on the bank's capital assets, relative to the risk of loss. If not,
     it is their job to maximize the recovery of capital as quickly as possible. Because these bankers did
       not write the original deal and have a very distant relationship with the business owner, they are
       well-positioned to make hard decisions, but they face limited personal career consequences if the
bank incurs a loss when exiting from the relationship.

                                             Gary was absolutely shocked. How could his bank see him
   "These bankers were idiots and           as high-risk? Had the bankers not read the recent finan-
   didn't understand his business."     cials? At this point, Gary could think only one thing: These
                                         bankers were idiots, and they clearly didn't understand his
                                               business. Gary tuned out from the meeting as his mind
                                            whirred through his potential next steps. He missed most
of the conversation as the bankers explained how they would increase his interest rates and restrict
his access to further increases in funding. He was livid.

220

---

                                                                                          The Power of One

  Immediately after the meeting, Gary rang his accountant, and his accountant called us. We arrived at
Gary's office the next day to find him still in denial, cursing and swearing about his bank's audacity
in increasing his rates.
We use a phrase in our business when we first meet most clients: "Business speaks Spanish, and banks
   (and investors) speak Portuguese. To the uninitiated, they sound like the same language, but they
  are actually totally different." This was exactly Gary's situation: He and the bankers were speaking
two different languages, but he couldn't tell the difference.

The Numbers                                              Profit & Loss                    2012           2013

Gary provided us with a copy of his last two years of     Revenue                        35,000,000     42,000,000
financials, as summarized to the right. Take a look.      Gross margin                   10,500,000     13,020,000

  At a glance, the business looks healthy. However,       Overheads                      6,751,140       8,401,150
  it faced a problem that's present in 80% to 90% of      EBIT                           3,748,860       4,618,850
  all companies that we visit: inadequate cash flow.      Interest                        1,165,900      1,363,480
  Businesses are profit-focused. In Gary's case, he       Tax                             930,280        1,172,348
  was looking at revenue and profit that were grow-                                                      2,083,022
 ing significantly, and he was feeling great.             Net profit                     1,652,680

     However, there is an old saying: "Revenue is         Depreciation                    (820,000)      (933,000)
  vanity, profit is sanity, and cash flow is king."
  You do not pay bills or distributions with profit.       Balance Sheet                  2012           2013
    You can buy your spouse that holiday house or
    nice car only when you have sufficient month-          Accounts receivable            6,712,330      8,630,137
    ly cash. Until businesses become serious about         Inventory                     10,336,960     14,291,507
   measuring and growing cash, in addition to prof-                                      17,049,290
 it, they often run short.                                 Current assets                               22,921,644
                                                           Fixed assets                  8,500,000       9,500,000
  What Is Cash Flow?                                       Total assets                  25,549,290     32,421,644

   The only indisputable facts in any set of finan-        Accounts payable              4,028,550       5,557,808
   cials are the numbers that relate to cash. Your         Short-term debt               5,019,740       7,279,813
  profit is an opinion, and data can be manipulated        Current liabilities            9,048,290     12,837,621
    to provide a specific outcome (Greg Crabtree's         Long-term debt                 9,000,000     10,000,000
    Simple Numbers from the previous chapter help
   expose this manipulation). Your balance sheet is        Total liabilities             18,048,290     22,837,621
   for the most part also an opinion; you can amend        Share capital                  2,001,000      2,001,000
  valuations to produce a desired result. Only your
  cash and debt balances are facts. Banks recognize        Retained earnings              5,500,000      7,583,022
     this and use these numbers to determine your          Total liabilities and equity  25,549,290     32,421,643
  performance.
                                                                                                         221

---

   Scaling Up

   Our first question for Gary was simple: "What was your cash
  flow in 2013?" Gary could not answer this. (Look back over the  "Only your cash and debt
  financials. Can you calculate the answer quickly?) Every day,   balances are facts."
  business leaders produce their financials and share the results
  with their management teams, and yet very few of them can
   readily answer such questions.

                                          Cash flow is an expression that is used in businesses every day: "I have good cash flow." "I need more
                                            cash flow." "We need to improve cash flow." Most businesspeople use the term to describe a general
                                        availability of cash. It refers to an almost intangible quality of a business. However, to a banker, cash
                                            flow has a specific value. It is a ratio that describes management competence. And that competence
                                           starts with you, the business leader, understanding the information that follows. If you don't, the
                                             money people will always have an advantage over you. In the sections to come, we will give you a
 high-level overview of what you need to understand to stay in control of your business.

                                                                                     Two Uses of Cash
                                            Whether you're sitting on a pile of cash or a mountain of debt, keep reading. The lessons apply to
 you in either case.
 Cash flow is the change in cash and debt balances across a given period. Because Gary operated using
an overdraft account, labeled on the balance sheet as "short-term debt," there is no specific "cash"
line item (i.e., he had no cash of his own in the bank). His short-term debt increased in 2013 from
$5 million to $7.3 million, and his long-term debt increased from $9 million to $10 million. The
company's cash flow for 2013 was minus $3.3 million. Gary had gone backward in cash.
This information, presented in this way, was new for Gary and surprised him a little.
    Opening net debt                             Owners like Gary choose to spend money every day to
    Short-term debt       5,019,740    grow their businesses. However, sometimes they are actu-
    Long-term debt        9,000,000           ally spending their hard-earned money to cover manage-
                                          ment-influenced waste (read that again). Did Gary actually
                         14,019,740         need to spend $3.3 million of new money from the bank to
    Closing net debt                        increase his revenue from $35 million to $42 million and
                                          to raise his profit from $1.7 million to $2.1 million — or
    Short-term debt     7,279,813            was this increase in borrowing used simply to fund poor
    Long-term debt       10,000,000    management practices? This question highlights the only
                                       two uses for cash flow:
                    17,279,813          Cash is used to invest in growth, or
   Net cash flow    -3,260,073          2.Cash is used to fund management-influenced waste.

And yet too few growing businesses are able to visualize their cash burn in this simple framework!

222

---

                                                                            The Power of One

Measuring Financial Success
(Prepare to read this three times and talk about it with your CFO or CPA. This is detailed —
but important!)
 While there are a number of measures of financial success, we focus on two:
  Cash flow
  2. Returns

 When accountants prepare a balance sheet, they generally follow a fairly standard formula:

  Equity = Current assets + Noncurrent assets (value not realized in current years)
               Current liabilities - Noncurrent liabilities
                           or
               Equity = CA + NCA - CL - NCL
                           or
               Equity = Assets - Liabilities


And a balance sheet will contain the following items:
    Equity                    CA                       NCA  CL               NCL
Share capital                 Cash                     Fixed assets  AP      LT debt
   Reserves                   AR                       Investments   ST debt  Other
Retire. income                Inventory                Intangible    Accruals
                              Other                    Other         Other
However, bankers are likely to have a fundamental issue with this structure. Would you not agree
that equity is a type of funding for the business? Your bank also provides funding. It stands to reason,
then, that if you group your funding on one side of the = sign, then the other side represents your
business's moneymaking machine, its operations, and its net operating assets.
Hence, your balance sheet equation can be rewritten as:

    Equity  Net debt          CA                       NCA           CL       NCL
Share capital      Cash                                Fixed assets  AP       Other
   Reserves        ST debt    AR                       Investments
Retire. income     LT debt    Inventory                Intangible    Accruals
                              Other                    Other         Other

                                                                                    223

---

    Scaling Up

                             Equity + Net debt = Net operating assets
                                                or
                       Equity + Net debt = Working capital + Other capital
(where Working capital = Accounts receivable + Inventory [or Work in progress] - Accounts payable)
                                                or
              Funding = Operations


    If we apply this to Gary's business, we see the following:





      Equity        +          Net debt            Working capital  + Other capital
    $9,584,023                 $17,279,813         $17,363,836        $9,500,000
                    Funding                        Operations/Net operating assets

    This highlights the fact that the bank has put approximately $2 into this business for every $1 invested
    by shareholders.
    The following table details the components of the net operating assets:
    Equity          Net debt           =           CA  NCA            CL           NCL
     9.6            17.3       AR                  8.6

                                   Inventory  14.3
                                       FA              9.5
                               AP                                     5.6
           Gary's Furniture has received $26.9 million in funding from shareholders and the company's bank.
         In turn, the management team has chosen to spend it, providing $8.6 million to customers (debtors)
    in the form of accounts receivable (AR); $14.3 million for stock (inventory); and $9.5 million in
    fixed assets. Trade creditors have also assisted by providing $5.6 million through the trading terms
    provided, in the form of accounts payable (AP).
    So, how can we tell whether Gary is doing a good job with the $26.9 million that he has received to run
    his business? The operations should be producing a satisfactory profit given the assets being deployed.
    224

---

                                                                       The Power of One

This return on net assets (return on capital) is represented as follows

EBIT/net operating assets = return on net assets
   (EBIT: earnings before interest and taxes)

This is arguably the most useful ratio for measuring management effectiveness. The ratio brings
into consideration both the P&L of the business (which provides the EBIT) and the balance sheet.
The famous DuPont Formula then takes this ratio and breaks it down into two components:
  EBIT  x        Revenue  = Return on net assets
Revenue    Net operating assets


 Operational Efficiency and Sales Effectiveness
    The beauty of the DuPont Formula is that it measures both the operational efficiency and the sales
   effectiveness of the company. The EBIT/Revenue ratio is a measure of P&L efficiency (i.e., how much


  In turn, the Revenue/Net operating assets ratio is a measure of balance sheet effectiveness known as
  asset turnover. It also is a key indicator of sales effectiveness — telling you how much revenue the
business can generate from the least amount of assets or investment.

              Return on Capital
 EBIT %        Asset Turnover    EBIT

     EBIT         Revenue    $4,618,850
  $4,618,850    $42,000,000

   Revenue  x  Net operating    Net operating
 $42,000,000       assets      assets
                $26,863,836
     11%           $1.56    $26,863,863
              17.19%

Tal o ' u p p .hl
short of our expectation of good business performance. By breaking down the performance into profit-
 alit and asset turnover we see that Gary is producing very strong profts.Anythig over 10% is good
 for a business like Gary's, based on Greg Crabtree's definitions of profit from the previous chapter.
                                                                    225

---

Scaling Up

However, Gary's Furniture is not performing in asset turnover. A business in Gary's industry should
expect to produce between $2 to $3 worth of revenue per $1 of net operating asset investment. Gary
is producing only $1.56. His balance sheet is carrying too much unproductive capital.

Most businesses that we see do not give regular consideration to their balance sheets. As these equa-
                          tions show, business leaders who ignore this information are missing a major determinant of how
successful they are and where opportunities for improvement might lie.

                                                              Minimum Return on Assets
                      What is a good return? Well, the answer is a relative one, as it will depend on the alternative invest-
                        ment choices available to investors. To keep it simple, however, midsize businesses should target at
                          minimum a 30% return on net assets. If you are not achieving this, you need to consider whether
                          the EBIT you are producing from the revenue generated is sufficient, or whether the business is
producing enough revenue for the assets being deployed. If not, your investors (that includes the
owners!) might be better off investing their money elsewhere.

Return on Net Assets  As a business owner, you should        "Midsize businesses should
                      also consider that equity is the       target at minimum a 30%
                      most expensive source of fund-         return on net assets."
EBIT                  ing and that it is usually cheap-
                      er to source debt financing
                      keeping in mind Greg Crabtree's caveats in the previous chapter.
          NOA         Either way, to improve returns, it is mission-critical over time that man-
                      agement grow EBIT faster than the investment in net operating assets.



Your Return Is a Measure of Your Strategy
Your return on assets is ultimately a measure of the success of your strategy. If your return is not at
the appropriate level, then management has five possible options available:  B
  If you grow EBIT and net operating assets at the same rate,  A              C
your business will travel along line C (see right), and you can
expect the same return over time.
    If you grow EBIT while keeping net operating assets con- E                 D
stant, you will travel along line B, and returns will increase.
  If you increase EBIT and reduce net assets, then you can ex-
 pect an even greater increase in returns. However, this route,               E
 option A, is not likely to be sustainable in the long term and
is used as a dramatic change strategy to get short-term relief.    NET OPERATING ASSETS
226

---

                                                                   The Power of One

Companies can also choose to leave EBIT the same and increase net operating assets (option D) or
                                                                 to reduce EBIT and increase net operating assets (option E). These are usually strategies deployed
during major investment periods, when you invest in new infrastructure knowing that you will enjoy
significant increases in EBIT in the long term.

Generally, businesses need strategies that focus performance between B and C, where you are in-
creasing EBIT faster than you are growing net assets and, consequently are growing returns.

                                                                                                           The 4 Drivers

So far, we have learned that it is possible to measure success using ratios that measure returns, yet as a
manager, you can't change returns directly. You need to modify aspects of the business — the drivers,
if you will — in order to change your returns.

                                                               There are 4 financial drivers. These four are represented under the "Business Perspective" in the dia-
gram below. And they inform the bank and investors about the two areas represented under the "Bank
Perspective." We'll next take a look at each of these key financial drivers from the business perspective.
  Business Perspective                                             Bank Perspective

     Profitability                                                 Debt service
                                                                   capability
  Working capital                                                  Financial
     management                                                    performance and
                                Noncurrent       Transparency      risk monitoring
                                asset
                                management
                                Cash flow/
                                funding

Driver #1: Profitability

Most businesspeople are focused on profitability and generally do a good job generating positive results,
like Gary. As Greg Crabtree noted in the previous chapter, the first place to focus in improving cash is
increasing profitability, and with Crabtree's Simple Numbers, Gary might do even better (see below).

Profitability    30 Jun 2012    30 Jun 2013      Change            Profitability Trends
 Revenue          35,000,000    42,000,000       +7,000,000        30.0 31.0
                                                                   ,28.9
 Revenue growth %    11.11              20.00    +8.89             26.7                               30 Jun 2010
                                                                                                      30 Jun 2011
  Gross margin %     30.00              31.00             +1.00                                       30 Jun 2012
                                                                                       30 Jun 2013
  Overheads %        19.29              20.00             +0.71                        8.3  10.7 11.0
  EBIT %             10.71              11.00             +0.29                        8.1           3.7 4.7~5.0
  EBIT               3,748,860  4,618,850        +869,990
  Net profit %       4.72       4.96                      +0.24    Gross margin %           EBIT %   Net profit %

                                                                                                                 227

---

 Scaling Up

 Driver #2: Working Capital Management

 Working capital is the amount of cash that your business requires to trade, and is generally consumed
 by two major current assets: your debtors (AR) and your inventory. Your trade creditors will fund
 some of this, so we always subtract AP from the other two figures when calculating working capital
 requirements. Working capital items are measured in days, to represent your current trading terms
 and requirements.

Because your working capital requires cash, banks will often calculate one additional working capital
ratio, known as working capital days. This ratio measures the total days' worth of working capital re-
quired by the business and is calculated as (AR + Inventory - AP)/sales x 100. Here are Gary's numbers:
 Working Capital         30 Jun 2012 30 Jun 2013  Change Working Capital Days
 ManagementX
 Debtors days            70.00      75.00     +5.00                          180
 Stock days              154.00    180.00    +26.00      141 148154                         30 Jun 2010
 Creditors days          60.02      70.00     +9.98                                         30 Jun 2011
                                                                                            30 Jun 2012
 Working capital days    163.98    185.00    +21.02      75                     30 Jun 2013
 Working capital %        37.20     41.34     +4.14      43 50 70               6670 60 70
 Marginal cash flow       -7.20      -10.34   -3.14
 Current ratio             1.88      1.79     -0.09      Debtors days        Stock days  Creditors days


  Driver #3: Noncurrent Asset Management

  Together, the key drivers measure the rest of a      Noncurrent Asset
  balance sheet's performance. For the most part,      Management                       30 Jun 2012    30 Jun 2013  Change
  the results are propelled by success in actively     Asset turnover                          1.63     1.56        -0.07
     managing and improving the measures iden-         Return on capital employed %           17.42     17.19       -0.23
   tified in drivers #1 and #2. Gary's driver #3       Return on total assets %        14.67            14.25       -0.42
 results are shown to the right:                       Return on equity %              22.03           21.73        -0.30

 Driver #4: Cash Flow/Funding

Last, we look at your cash performance, some-        Cash Flow/Funding             30 Jun 2012     30 Jun 2013      Change
    thing bankers and investors care most about.       Net debt                    14,019,740         17,279,812    +3,260,072
   This driver helps predict the likelihood that       Net cash flow                   -3,258,560     -3,260,072    -1,512
  you'll be able to pay them back! Gary's results      Debt to equity                  1.87            1.80         -0.07
are at the right:                                      Interest cover                  3.22            3.39         +0.17
                                                       Operating cash flow             -162,380        275,761      +438,141



228

---

                                                                                        The Power of One

Marginal Cash Flow
     Another useful measure of cash flow is marginal cash flow. This ratio calculates the amount of cash
         retaied by the busines's working capial machine and compare it to the amount o cash the busness
produces at the gross margin level.
     If we look at Gary's business, we see that it produced a gross margin of $13 million out of the $42
    million in revenue that the business achieved in 2013. We also see that the working capital percent-
      ag of the business (Working capital/Revenue) is calculated as $17. million divided by $42 million.

Marginal Cash Flow for the Next $1 of Sales
Gross margin                                  13,020,000/42,000,000             31%
Less
Accounts receivable                8,630,137
Inventory                          14,291,507
Accounts payable                   (5,557,808)
Working capital                                       17,363,836/42,000,000     41%

                  The Problem: Growing Broke!

  If we consider both ratios as cents from every dollar of revenue, we see that Gary's business produced
                                   a gross margin of 31 cents for every $1 of revenue. We also see that the business requires 41 cents of
working capital for every $1 of revenue. This means that for every $1 of sales, the business requires 10
  cents more working capital than it actually produces in gross margin. In 60% of businesses that we are
                                    called upon to diagnose, we observe a similar relationship between gross margin and working capital.
   As a result, every time that Gary sold $1 of product, he went backward in cash. This is what we meant
earlier when we said he was "growing broke."
To fix this, Gary had a choice of two main strategies:
1. Increasing his gross margin.
2Reducing his working capital.

   If he didn't make a change in the relationship between working capital and profitability, his company
        was not going to survive. Gary's bank was acutely aware of this problem. In 2013, Gary's revenue
        grew by $7 million; hence, the bank funded $700,000 of his cash problem. Given that the bank was
ceasing to provide further increases, Gary could not continue in this manner.
 Our final cash-flow measure highlights in simple terms the key difference between profit and cash flow.


229

---

Scaling Up

                    Operating cash flow reflects the impact of movements in your working capital on your earnings
               before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) over a certain period. Bankers use
this measure to calculate your debt service capacity. You should be using it as your means to increase
cash for growth, distributions, and other advantages that a cashed-up business will provide.

The following table details the calculation:

 Profit vs. Cash Flow

 Profit                                             Cash Flow                                          Variance
 Revenue                             42,000,000     Cash from customers                  40,082,193    -1,917,807
  Cost of goods sold/direct costs    28,980,000     Cash to suppliers                    31,405,289    -2,425,289
  Gross margin                       13,020,000     Gross cash profit                   8,676,904      -4,343,096

  Overheads excluding depreciation   7,468,150      Overheads excluding depreciation    7,468,150
 EBITDA                              5,551,850      Operating cash flow                   1,208,754    -4,343,096


 As you can see from this table, while Gary's management team was congratulating itself for producing
an EBITDA performance of $5.6 million in 2013, the business actually posted a cash flow loss before
depreciation ($1.1 million) of $4.3 million.

 Gary's bankers were not most concerned that cash-flow performance was poor. They were alarmed
by the fact that Gary's team didn't even know what was going on.

The underlying business was strong, and the cash-flow performance could be fixed with some minor
 tweaks. To do this, we needed to work out what financial changes were possible. This is where what
 we call "The Power of One" becomes a useful tool. But first, back to the bank


The Bank

Through our analysis, we were able to highlight a number of points that were hurting the banking
relationship, to Gary's surprise:
1. The bank had $2 in the business for every $1 invested by shareholders.
2.In Gary's case, volume is detrimental to cash. The more Gary sold, the worse his cash got
   (his gross margin percentage was 31%, while his working capital percentage was 41%).
3. Gary didn't have the cash capacity to repay the bank. His operating cash was $1.2 million in
   2013, and yet he still had tax of $1.2 million, his inter-
   est bill was $1.4 million, and he had also purchased $1    "Gary's bankers aren't the
   million of fixed assets.                                   idiots he thought they were!"

Perhaps Gary's bankers aren't the idiots he thought they were!

230

---

                                                                            The Power of One

                                                                               The Power of One and the 7 Levers

                                               Managers adjust the 4 drivers by tweaking the 7 main financial levers available to them to improve
cash and returns in the business:
1Price: You can increase the price of your goods and services.
2. Volume: You can sell more units at the same price.
3.Cost of goods sold (COGS)/direct costs: You can reduce the price you pay for your raw
 materials and direct labor.
4. Operating expenses: You can reduce your operating costs.
5.Accounts receivable: You can collect from your debtors faster.
6.Inventory/work in progress: You can reduce the amount of stock you have on hand.
7.Accounts payable: You can slow down the payment of creditors.
                                             So that you can see how to make use of these tools, it's helpful to understand the benefit to cash if
                                             either a 1% or a one-day change is made to each of these levers. We call this "The Power of One." Once
                                              armed with this information, management can construct a plan that focuses the business on achieving
a particular cash or return outcome using key performance indicators (KPIs) around these 7 levers.

When we calculated Gary's Power of One, we found the following results:

The Impact of 1% and One-Day Changes Across the Board

 Your Power of One                                   Net Cash Flow $           EBIT S
 Your current position                                        -3,260,073    4,618,850

                                                              Impact on     Impact on
 Your Power of One               - 1.0 +     Reset          Cash Flow $        EBIT $

 Price increase %                - 1.0 +     %                  333,699       420,000

 Volume increase %               - 1.0 +     %                  -43,438       130,200

 COGS reduction %                - 1.0 +     %                  377,137       289,800
 Overheads reduction %           - 1.0 +     %                   84,012        84,012

 Reduction in debtors days       - 1.0 +     days               115,068

 Reduction in stock days         - 1.0 +     days                79,397

 Increase in creditors days      - 1.0 +     days                79,397     -

 Your Power of One Impact                                     1,025,272     924,012

 Your Power of One                                    Net Cash Flow $       EBIT $
 Your adjusted position                                       -2,234,801    5,542,862
                                                                                     231

---

Scaling Up

                                                    This table shows that if Gary were to improve every driver by 1% or one day, the positive impact
on cash flow would be more than $1 million, and EBIT would improve by more than $900,000. In
                                                 reality, improving all drivers isn't feasible (at least, not simultaneously). This is where management
                                                   should start to set specific goals: combinations and increments of the 1% and one-day changes that
are actually achievable.
In Gary's case, we set the following combination:
    The Impact of Customized Changes

    Your Power of One                                            Net Cash Flow $    EBIT $
     Your current position                                            -3,260,073    4,618,850

                                                                       Impact on    Impact on
     Your Power of One              - 0.0 +         Reset            Cash Flow $    EBIT $
    Price increase %                       1.0+     %                    333,699    420,000
      Volume increase %                    0.0+     %                          0    0
      COGS reduction %                     0.0+     %                          0    0
      Overheads reduction %          -  2.0+        %        168,023                168,023
      Reduction in debtors days         5.0+        days     575,342
      Reduction in stock days           - 15.0+     days     1,190,959
      Increase in creditors days     -  0.0+        days     0
      Your Power of One Impact                               2,268,023              588,023

    Your Power of One                                        Net Cash Flow $        EBIT $
    Your adjusted position                                   -992,050               5,206,873
                                                  While the changes to profit were not large, the true value for the business came from the changes to
                                                  the working capital. If the business could reduce its debtors (AR) by 5 days and its inventory by 15
                                               days, more than $1.7 million of additional cash would be available to the business to reduce its debt and
                                                 rebuild its relationship with the bank. Neither move was seen as a stretch. And overall, these changes
                                                 would reduce the negative cash from $3.3 million to just under $1 million, a substantial improvement.
                                                  The next step was to turn these changes into a formal KPI structure against which the business could
                                                  measure its progress. The first two tables on Page 233 were constructed, with the right-hand columns
 representing good, average, and bad results.
                                                    The ideal profile was constructed to guide management and provide a means for simple comparison
                                                         against actual results. Ranges were   that Gary's mangement was able  construct a nhy
                                                 results table, which demonstrated in simple colors how the company was doing in light of its KPIs set.
 232

---

                                                                                                               The Power of One

   1  Profitability    Ideal Profile  C                                                         Gary's opening results are shown in
   Sales %               100                                                                    tables 3 and 4.
   Gross margin %            30        >30    28-30    <28                                      By color-coding the results in green
   Overheads %               20     <20       20-22    >22                                      (for good), yellow (for average), or red
   EBIT %                    10        >10     8-10  <8                                           (for bad), the team could get a very

 2-Working Capital Ideal Profile        G       A       B                                        quick visual assessment of its perfor-
  AR days                    60        <60    60-70    >70                                        mance. The more results were green,
                             90                                                                   the more cash the business was pro-
   Inventory/WIP days                  <90  90-100     >100                                        ducing. The more red and yellow we
  AP days*                   60                                                                 saw, the worse the cash performance.
   Working capital %         22        <22  22-25      >25                                       Gary was told to roll out this program
 *Your good, average, and bad results will depend on your relationships with your suppliers      across all aspects of his business, so

                                                                                                 that everyone knew the parameters for

  3-Profitability      Ideal Profile  G             B                                             success and the progress the company
                                                                                                 was making. He focused his sales team
  Sales %                   100                                                                on the sales and gross margin results,
   Gross margin %            30     31                                                          since it had responsibility for product
  Overheads %                20            20                                                     discounting. The buying team looked
  EBIT %                     10         11                                                       for products that would enhance gross
                                                                                                   margins. The finance and HR units
 4 -Working Capital    Ideal Profile    G  A            B                                          kept an eye on operating expenses.
 AR days                 60                             75                                       Both the sales team and finance mon-
  Inventory/WIP days         90                        180                                        itored AR. Meanwhile, the warehouse
 AP days                     60            (70)                                                group monitored and reduced stock,
  Working capital %          22                         41                                      and finance focused on when the com-
                                                                                               pany paid creditors (AP).

                                 Working together, with clear definitions of success - and using Miltz's inexpensive online software
tool at www.cashflowstory.com — Gary's team turned around the business cash flow very quickly. The
company has now moved to a much more favorable position with its bankers, who were astounded by
                               the business's rapid turnaround and significant debt reductions. Today, Gary has a standard reporting
format that he uses to inform his board. It's available at scalingup.com.

As mentioned in the beginning of this section, you can get by with decent People, Strategy, and Ex-
                               ecution, but not if you run out of Cash. All growth firms hit bumps in the road (or craters!). Having
sufficient cash is key to surviving another day. We hope the ideas, tools, and techniques covered in
this section help you through the rough times and fuel your good times as you scale up your business.







233

---

NO_CONTENT_HERE

---

NEXT STEPS
5 Things to Do Now



 Thank you for reading Scaling Up. To jump-start implementation and benefit immediately from the
 ideas in this book, here are five things to do now:
   1. Have your entire leadership team (and employees) read or listen to the book. And Verne's
     entire 2.5 day Scaling Up course is online at www.growthinstitute.com. This will give every-
     one a common language and context for implementation. Then complete a complimentary
     4 Decisions Assessment and decide which of the four — People, Strategy, Execution, or
     Cash — to pursue first. Go to that section of the book and focus on reading and implementing
     one chapter per month for the next quarter. The assessment, list of public (or private) work-
     shops, and bulk discounts on books are available at scalingup.com.
   2. Form a weekly"council." In addition to organizing a weekly management meeting, assem-
     ble a few key leaders to discuss strategies and the bigger opportunities and challenges facing
     the company. Go to Pages 108-109 to review the details of this crucial weekly "talk time'
     routine. Focus on completing the 7 Strata of Strategy worksheet; assembling a list of influ-
     encers; and working through the 4Ps or 4Es of marketing.
  3.Launch a Quarterly Theme. Choose a measurable goal that addresses some choke point
     in the business (something keeping you awake at night), and focus the entire company on
     achieving it in the next few weeks. There's no need for a fancy theme if you're short on time.
     Put up a whiteboard in a common area of the company, and start tracking progress via the
     daily huddle. Then host a celebration at the end. Pick a goal that's challenging but doable, so
     the team tastes success quickly.
  4.Start the daily huddle. Begin by holding a daily huddle for the executive team. Then, when
     these leaders are comfortable with the routine, let them implement it with their respective
       teams, cascading this crucial communication rhythm down through the organization. Share
     specifics, but don't fall into the trap of problem-solving, and keep these initial huddles to 15
     minutes or less.
  5.Plan your first quarterly or annual offsite (best if facilitated). Set the dates for your
    next strategic planning session and start preparations — employee and customer surveys,
     completion of the SWOT by middle management and completion of the SWT by the
   top leadership team. Once at the offsite, start filling in the boxes of the various one-page
    Growth Tools. Focus initially on the basic decisions represented on the Vision Summary
    worksheet (Core Values, Purpose, Brand Promises, BHAG®, and Priorities) and choose a
     couple of habits from the Rockefeller Habits Checklist to implement next.

                                                                                              235

---

  Scaling Up

 Most important, relax with the process. Thousands of companies have successfully implemented the
 Rockefeller Habits.

 One Step at a Time

 Whatever you do, avoid doing everything all at once. Our 4D Framework is a process of working
    on one aspect of the business at a time so no one gets overwhelmed. It generally takes two to three
      years for all the tools, techniques, and habits to become part of the company's DNA, and another
 two to three years to truly master the use of them.

It is critical to pick someone to drive overall implementation of the Rockefeller Habits. For many
  founders, it might be best to give this accountability to your #2 in command. Verne wrote a column
specifically for entrepreneurs on how to "Hire the Right #2." Go to scalingup.com to download a copy.

You're Not Alone — Coaching, Learning, and Technology

 To support and speed up your implementation of our tools and make the process more enjoyable,
we've built a team on six continents offering a variety of services, including:
         Coaching: No one has ever achieved peak performance without a coach. If you need help im-
      plementing these tools, we can give you access to our elite team of certified coaching partners
    spanning the globe. Utilizing a coach fast-tracks implementation and takes a load off the lead-
    ership team, so you're generating significant revenue and profits much sooner. Book a compli-
    mentary 30-minute call for a debriefing on your 4 Decisions Assessment.
    Learning: Book your team into a one-day public or private Scaling Up workshop. Take the idea
    further, and have a member of your team earn a Rockefeller Habits Master Practitioner Certifi-
    cation through our online learning and coaching program. This person can support implemen-
    tation internally.
    In addition, we can offer you an extensive online array of accredited short courses, taught by
    top business thought leaders, to provide you and your management team with the kind of con-
    tinuing business education in leadership, marketing, sales, hiring, etc., that keeps you ahead of
    the competition. You can access all of this from the comfort of your desk or home.
    Technology: We offer an online software-as-a-service (SaaS) management accountability sys-
   tem called Align, which has more than 3,000 users. It's the CEO's (or COO's) tool for manag-
       ing the cascading priorities, key performance indicators, and accountabilities that can become
    an Excel-spreadsheet nightmare when you grow beyond a handful of employees, especially
    when your teams are spread across multiple locations. We also offer a SaaS called Better Book
    Club that helps you get employees reading books and applying what they learn to improve
   your organization.


236

---

                                                                               Next Steps

These support systems typically provide a 10x return on your investment. Information is available
at scalingup.com.

Who Will Succeed
In 2002, the year Mastering the Rockefeller Habits was first published, Verne hosted the 10-year reunion
for the "Birthing of Giants" executive program he founded and chaired on the campus of MIT. This
program was the genesis of what you've learned in this book. During the Q and A session, one of
the alumni asked him a key question: "Over the years, you have seen many business leaders succeed and
fail. Have you noticed anything specific about those who made it to greatness?"
Verne's answer to that question is the same today. Success belongs to those who have these two
attributes:
  An insatiable desire to learn
  An unquenchable bias for action
 Those who win are constantly looking for better ways to do things and to improve. They don't sit back
 and let others pass them by. They use their tools and resources to attack issues and make things happen.
 It's that simple. Want to succeed with this book and your business? Keep on learning and acting as
 you scale up.










237

---

3 SUGGESTED PRIORITIES
FOR GROWING YOUR BUSINESS

Sign up for Verne Harnish's "Weekly Insights" to receive the latest
 in ideas, tools, and techniques for growing your business
 Download editable copies of the One-Page Strategic Plan                T 5 B Ster
 and other One-Page tools - and access a complimentary "vook            PO
 (video book) that guides you through each tool                         BU
3. Access short "Growth Guy" articles offering practical
 tips on setting up advisory boards, daily huddles for sales people,    by Ver
 and 75 other topics


Go to www.gazelles.com

 PEOPLE            STRATEGY           EXECUTION         CASH                       Gazelles
                                                                                   GROWING LEADERS- GROWING COMPANIES

Want a Tool to Help Implement the                                                  DRIVE CULTURE.
Rockefeller Habits?                                                                DELIVER KNOWLEDGE.
align                                                                              REWARD RESULTS.
                                      Cloud-Based Business Management Software     Effective and inexpensive
                                      Get Started Now at aligntoday.com            training program
                                                                                   Increase your team's
                                                                                   human capital
                                                                                   Reward your employees
 The entire Rockefeller Habits tool set accessible through                         for reading relevant books
 the web via your desktop or mobile device
 Run your Daily Huddle directly from the application                              When individual team
 See current and past One Page Plans as you update it                             members learn and grow,
 for the future                                                                   the entire company learns
                                                                                  and grows.
  Informative Reports                 Task Management

  Quickly Update Your KPIs            M Top Priority Calendar                               Better
                                                                                            GBook
  Organized Daily Huddles             D Paperless One Page Plan                             Club.com

For more info visit aligntoday.com    Email us at info@aligntoday.com             For more info visit betterbookclub.com

---

    LEARN. GROW. SCALE.

    Gazelles International Coaches Help Businesses Accelerate Growth Worldwide


    For Emerging Growth Companies
    Our Certified Coaches deliver IMPACT by bringing the most effective tools and best
    practices to growth companies all over the world.
    ATTEND our Rockefeller Habits Four Decisions™ workshops held on six continents
    to build your One-Page Strategic Plan™
    LOCATE a Certified Coach or learn more about coaching at GlCoaches.com or
    email us at info@GICoaches.com

                                                                                                          Four Decisions
    GICoaches.com                                                                                         Gazelles
    Best Education. Best Tools. Best Community.                                                           CERTIFIED
    Gazelles International certification require over 30 hours of Continuous Education to master annually.




    WATCH. LEARN. IMPLEMENT


    Gazelles
GROWTH INSTITUTE
                         Fully Accredited Corporate Business Institute

    CALL US NOW FOR A FREE TRIAL

    Topgrading. LEADERSHIP  High Stakes                    Scaling-up Club
                CHALLENGE NE EOTIATIONS                    by Gazelles Growth Institute

    AdvancED                                                    www.growthinstitute.com
    ACCREDITED I SACS    1 800 975 5108 I1 1 512 773 5465   support@growthinstitute.com

---

 Scaling Up

   Key Resources in Scaling Up

NOTE: Some websites require that you register or pay for access to the full text of articles.

 Antifragile: Things That Gain From Disorder/        4              Turn the Ship Around! A True Stor                     29
 Nassim Nicholas Taleb                                              of Turning Followers into Leaders/

 The E-Myth Revisited/Michael E. Gerber              4             L. David Marquet

 The Lean Startup/Eric Ries                      4,53               Relationship Marketing: Successful Strategies for     30
                                                                   The Age of the Customer/Regis McKenna
 "Give the Gazelles a Break"                          4             Confessions of a Pricing Man: How Pricing Affects 31
 Ann Wright interview with Verne Harnish/                           Everything/Hermann Simon
Business Review Europe                                              Buyer Personas: How to Gain Insight into your         31
 "High-Impact Firms: Gazelles Revisited"/             4            Customer's Expectations, Align your Marketing
Zoltan J. Acs, William Parsons, and Spencer Tracy                   Strategies, and Win More Business/Adele Revella
for the US Small Business Administration                           Crucial Conversations: Tools for Talking               35

 Willful Blindness: Why We Ignore the Obvious         5            When Stakes Are High/Kerry Patterson,
at Our Peril/Margaret Heffernan                                    Joseph Grenny, Ron McMillan, and Al Switzler
Multipliers: How the Best Leaders              5,75, 79             The Billionaire Who Wasn't: How Chuck Feeney         44
Make Everyone Smarter/Liz Wiseman                                  Secretly Made and Gave Away a Fortune!
with Greg McKeown                                                  Conor O'Clery
Good to Great: Why Some Companies                 10, 109, 120     The Business of Happiness: 6 Secrets to               44
Make the Leap.. And Others Don't/                                  Extraordinary Success in Life and Work/
Jim Collins                                                        Ted Leonsis with John Buckley
The Five Dysfunctions of a Team:                   15, 75, 151     The Soul of Money: Transforming Your                  45
A Leadership Fable/Patrick M. Lencioni                             Relationship With Money and Lifel
                                                                   Lynne Twist with Teresa Barker
Great by Choice: Uncertainty, Chaos, 17, 31, 145, 195              KPI library/online resource/ServiceNow                49
and Luck — Why Some Thrive Despite                                 Key Performance Indicators: The 75 Measures           49
Them All/Jim Collins and Morten T. Hansen                          Every Manager Needs to Know/Bernard Marr
"How Fast Can Your Company                17, 200, 205             The Great Game of Business:                50, 72, 152, 157
Afford to Grow?"/Neil C. Churchill and                            The Only Sensible Way to Run a Company/
John W. Mullins/Harvard Business Review                           Jack Stack
"Businesses Worth Repeating"/                           23        How the Mighty Fall, And Why Some Companies −51
Verne Harnish/Fortune                                              Never Give In/Jim Collins
"Evolution and Revolution as Organizations              26         Lean execution/online video interview                 54
Grow"/Larry E. Greiner/Harvard Business Review                     with Guy Parsons/scalingup.com
Emergence: The Connected Lives of Ants                  28         The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right/ 57
Brains, Cities, and Software/Steven Johnson                        Atul Gawande

240

---

                                                                                            Key Resources

"Secrets From Apple's Genius Bar:                  57          Uncommon Service: How to Win by            76, 116, 117
Full Loyalty, No Negativity"/Yukari Iwatani Kane               Putting Customers at the Core of Your Business/
and Ian Sherr/The Wall Street Journal                          Frances Frei and Anne Morriss
"How to Create Scorecards for Topgrading"/ 60                  The New Rules of Marketing & PR:               77, 111
Toby Jenkins/Bluewire Media Web Strategy Blog                  How to Use Social Media, Online Video, Mobile
First, Break All the Rules: What the World's    61, 80        Applications, Blogs, News Releases, and Viral Marketing
Greatest Managers Do Differently/                             to Reach Buyers Directly/David Meerman Scott
Marcus Buckingham and Curt Coffman                            Outliers: Why People Are Successful/                   78
 Change to Strange: Create a Great Organization    61          video seminar/Malcolm Gladwell/scalingup.com
by Building a Strange Workforce/Daniel M. Cable               The Happiness Advantage/online video/                  78
Assess Systems' pre-employment tests and           65          Shawn Achor
 Objective Management Group's Sales Assessments                The Weekly Coaching Conversation:              79,80
  Who: The A Method for Hiring/                    65          A Business Fable About Taking Your Game
 Geoff Smart and Randy Street                                  and Your Team to the Next Level/Brian Souza
 Topgrading: The Proven Hiring and                 65          Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead/           79
 Promoting Method That Turbocharges Company                    Sheryl Sandberg
 Performance/Bradford D. Smart                                 Leadership and the One Minute Manager:                80
  Certified Master Practitioner training            65         Increasing Effectiveness Through Situational
  in Topgrading/scalingup.com                                  Leadership/Ken Blanchard, Patricia Zigarmi,
  Drive: The Surprising Truth About             70, 72         and Drea Zigarmi                                      80
   What Motivates Us/Daniel H. Pink                             Help Them Grow or Watch Them Go:
  Peak: How Great Companies Get                         71      Career Conversations Employees Want/
  Their Mojo from Maslow/Chip Conley                            Beverly Kaye and Julie Winkle Giulioni               85
   "How Netflix Reinvented HR"/                      72-73      Hidden Champions of the 21st Century/
  Patty McCord/Harvard Business Review                          Hermann Simon
   StrengthsFinder assessments                     74          "Building Your Company's Vision"/              96, 98
   from Gallup Strengths Center                               James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras/
                                                               Harvard Business Review
   Now, Discover Your Strengths/                   74           "The Core Competence of the Corporation"/            98
  Marcus Buckingham and Donald O. Clifton                       C.K. Prahalad and Gary Hamel/
  Trombone Player Wanted/a six-DVD series/         74           Harvard Business Review
  Marcus Buckingham                                             Lords of Strategy: The Secret Intellectual History  109
  The One Thing You Need to Know... About          74         of the New Corporate World/Walter Kiechel II
  Great Managing, Great Leading, and Sustained                  Google AdWords Keyword Planner                      111
  Individual Success/Marcus Buckingham
  Good Company: Business Success in the            75          Epic Content Marketing: How to Tell a Different      112
   Worthiness Era/Laurie Bassi, Ed Frauenheim,                 Story, Break Through the Cluttr, and Win More
  and Dan McMurrer, with Larry Costello                        Customers by Marketing Less/Joe Pulizzi
                                                                                                                    241

---

Scaling Up

"Your Career Success Hinges on One Word:              112          "Growth as a Process"/                              163
Do You Know It?"/Verne Harnish/LinkedIn                            Interview with Jeffrey R. Immelt by
The Inside Advantage: The Strategy That            112, 113        Thomas A. Stewart/Harvard Business Review           170
Unlocks the Hidden Growth in Your Business/                        The Ultimate Question 2.0:
Robert H. Bloom and Dave Conti                                     How Net Promoter Companies Thrive in a
How Companies Win: Profiting From                  112, 113        Customer-Driven World/Fred Reichheld
Demand-Driven Business Models No Matter                             "The Happiest Man in Detroit"                      172
 What Business You're In/Rick Kash and                              Keith Naughton/Bloomberg Businessweek
 David Calhoun                                                     Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr./         175

 Turning Goals Into Results: The Power                115           Ron Chernow                                         175
 of Catalytic Mechanisms"/Jim Collins/                              "CEO of the Year: T. Boone Pickens"/
 Harvard Business Review                                            Kerry Curry/D CEO
 "What Is Strategy?"/Michael E. Porter/               117           Managing Up: How to Forge an Effective              176
 Harvard Business Review                                            Relationship With Those Above You/
                                                                    Rosanne Badowski
 ROAR! Get Heard in the Sales and                           117      Competing on Internet Time: Lessons From           177
 Marketing Jungle: A Business Fable                                  Netscape and Its Battle With Microsoft/
 Kevin Daum with Daniel A. Turner                                    Michael A. Cusumano and David B. Yoffie
  "The X-Factor"/Verne Harnish/Fortune                      119      Simple Numbers, Straight Talk, Big Profits! 195, 207
  Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary             120      4 Keys to Unlock Your Business Potential/
  Companies/Jim Collins and Jerry I. Porras                          Greg Crabtree with Beverly Blair Harzog
 The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People:              133, 149      The Customer-Funded Business: Start, Finance,     200
 Powerful Lessons in Personal Change/                                or Grow Your Company With Your Customers'
  Stephen R. Covey                                                   Cash/John Mullins
  The Balanced Scorecard: Translating Strategy        135             "High Stakes Negotiation"/online course/         202
                                                                      Victoria Medvec/scalingup.com
  Into Action/Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton                    "Finding Money You Didn't Know You Had"/ 204
  The Innovator's Dilemma: The Revolutionary Book 138                 Verne Harnish/Fortune Small Business
  That Will Change the Way You Do Business/                           "Right Away and All at Once:                      209
  Clayton M. Christensen                                              How We Saved Continental"/
  "Get in the Game" workshop/Jack Stack               157             Greg Brenneman/Harvard Business Review
  Bringing Out the Best in People: How to Apply       159             Microsoft MapPoint software                  209-210
  the Astonishing Power of Positive Reinforcement/                    (to be replaced by Bing Maps on Jan. 1, 2015)     210
  Aubrey C. Daniels                                                   Intellectual Capital: The New
  Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform          162             Wealth of Organizations/Thomas A. Stewart
  How We Live, Work, and Think/Viktor                                 "Hire the Right #2"/                              236
  Mayer-Schönberger and Kenneth Cukier                                Verne Harnish/scalingup.com
  242

---

                                                                                                            Index

  An Index of Selected Terms, People, Companies, and Authors in Scaling Up

NOTE: In the case of terms and topics mentioned throughout the book, this index lists major references.

 4 Decisions, 2, 3, 9-19, 93                                    Bloom, Robert H., 112, 113
 4 Decisions Assessment, 9, 235, 236                            Booth, Jeff, 53-54, 111-112, 116, 122
 4D Framework, 7-9                                              Brand Promise, 13, 61, 70, 112-113, 114-115, 127
  Driver, Demands, Disciplines, Decisions                       130-131
 4Es of marketing, 108, 235                                     Brand Promise Guarantee, 13, 115-116
4Q (4 Questions), 168                                           Brenneman, Greg, 209
 5Fs: Faith, Family, Friends, Fitness, Finance, 44              Browne, Gene, 59, 64-65, 75, 77-78, 149, 153-156, 157
 7 financial levers, 18, 195, 200, 205, 219, 220, 231, 232      Buckingham, Marcus, 61, 73, 74, 80
 7 Strata of Strategy, 2, 13, 14, 86, 87, 107-122, 235          BuildDirect.com, 53-54, 111-112, 113-114, 115, 116
                                                               118, 119, 122
 Accountability, Responsibility, and Authority, 42-43
 Achor, Shawn, 78                                               Cable, Daniel M., 61
 Actions, 37, 91, 129-130, 132                                 Calano, Jimmy, 166
Ammex, 180                                                      Calhoun, David, 112, 113
 AmRest Holdings, 76-77, 172                                    Cash Acceleration Strategies (CASh) tool, 18, 195
 Appletree Answers, 63, 93, 99-105, 169-170                   196, 199-205
Aquire, 73                                                      cash conversion cycle (CCC), 17, 199-205
Ashiana Housing, 187-189                                        Cash Flow Story, 219
 Atlassian, 62, 75, 166                                         Catapult Systems, 199, 202, 204
                                                                celebrations, 75, 133, 158-159, 235
 Badowski, Rosanne, 176                                        Chernow, Ron, 175
Banks, Rob, 107                                                Christensen, Clayton M., 138
 barriers, 5, 21-25                                             Churchill, Neil C., 17, 200, 205
  leadership, 5, 25, 27-29, 31                                  City Bin Co., The, 59, 64-65, 75, 77-78, 149
  scalable infrastructure, 5, 25, 29-30, 31                   153-156, 157
  marketing, 5, 25, 30-31                                      CJ Advertising, 77
Bassi, Laurie, 75                                             Cleary, Andy, 184
Benetton India Private Ltd., 167, 204                          Clifton, Donald O., 74
Benjamin Franklin International School, 139                    Coastal.com, 145, 169
Big Ass Fans/Big Ass Solutions, 128, 164                      Coffman, Curt, 61, 80
Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG®), 6, 13, 29,                  Collins, Jim, 6, 13, 17, 32, 51, 96, 109, 115, 120-121,
 120-122, 127, 129-130                                        126, 145, 195
Bikoff, J. Darius, 110                                        Conley, Chip, 71
Blanchard, Ken, 79, 80                                        Conti, Dave, 112, 113
Blinds.com, 76                                                Cooper, Dwight, 203

                                                                                                                243

---

    Scaling Up

    Core Competencies, 93, 98-99, 128, 139                         Gerber, Michael E., 4
    Core Purpose, 16, 29, 59, 70, 93, 97, 98, 101-106, 124,        Giulioni, Julie Winkle, 80
    127, 129-130, 150, 160, 173, 174, 235                          Gladwell, Malcolm, 78
    Core Values, 29, 76, 80, 93-96, 101-106, 173                   Goals, 6-7, 131-132
    council, 12, 108-109, 235                                      Godsey, Ben, 152-153, 159
    Covey, Stephen R., 133, 149                                    Goldsmith, Marshall, 45, 172
   Crabtree, Greg, 195, 207, 210-211, 213, 216, 221, 225,         Goodner, Sam, 199, 202, 204-205
   226, 227                                                        Good Night Medical, 23
   Crabtree, Rowe & Berger, 207                                    Gray, Jade, 174
   Critical Number, 72, 127, 131-132, 133, 134, 152-153,          Greiner, Larry E., 26
    157, 158-159, 172                                             Gung Ho! Pizza, 170-171, 174
   Croft, Jon, 75, 78-79                                          Gupta, Vishal, 187-189
    Crosetto, Fred, 180
    Cukier, Kenneth, 162                                         Hallberg, Chuck, 23
    Cusumano, Michael A., 177                                    Hamel, Gary, 6, 98-99, 109

    daily huddle, 23, 178-183, 235                                Hansberger, James, 44
  Daly, Jack, 75                                                 Hansen, Morten T., 17, 32, 145, 195
  Daniels, Aubrey C., 159                                        Happy Lawn, 120
  Daum, Kevin, 117                                               Hardy, Roger, 145, 169
  Differentiating Activities, 117-118                            Harrington, Jack, 24, 158
  Donnelly, Kevin, 66                                            Hedgehog Concept, 121
                                                                 Heffernan, Margaret, 5

 EmploymentGroup, 62                                             Hersey, Paul, 79
                                                                 Higgins, Alan, 126, 165
  Ersek, Barrett, 120, 126, 209-210                              Holganix, 120, 126
  Express-Med, 21-22
  Ezypay, 96, 173                                                Ignite Social Media, 149-150
                                                                 Infusionsoft, 1
 Fathom, 73
 Frei, Frances, 76, 116-117                                     Jacobson, Nelson, 123-124, 137
 Fullerton, Mark, 48                                            Jagger, Mike, 53-54
 Function Accountability Chart (FACe), 10, 11, 36,             Job Scorecard, 51, 59-61, 65, 74
 38, 46-51                                                     Johnson, Steven, 28
    Person Accountable, 11, 47-51, 132                         JSJ Corporation, 123-124, 137
    Results/Outcomes, 11, 50
                                                                Kaplan, Robert S., 135
Garbage University, 75, 77                                     Kash, Rick, 112, 113
 Gawande, Atul, 57                                             Kay, Rick, 184-185, 188
gazelles, 1, 3-4, 97, 209                                      Kaye, Beverly, 80
244

---

                                                                                                          Index

Keating, Nathan, 219                                           Naughton, Keith, 172
Key Initiatives, 125, 131, 132                                Net Promoter Score/Net Promoter System (NPS)
key performance indicators (KPIs), 11, 28, 46, 49-50,        135, 145, 169, 170-171
56, 72, 120, 130, 134, 135, 163, 171, 174, 199, 231, 232     Norton, David P., 135
Kept Promise Indicators, 13, 113, 115, 131, 135               Nurse Next Door, 53-54
Key Thrusts/Capabilities, 125, 127, 131
Kiechel III, Walter, 109                                      O'Clery, Conor, 44
                                                               offsites, 137, 152, 158, 180, 190, 235
Lean principles, 11, 53-55, 56, 73, 202                       O'Loghlen, John, 174
Lean Institute, 54                                             One-Page Personal Plan (OPPP), 10, 36, 37, 43-45, 172
Lencioni, Patrick M., 15, 75, 151                              One-Page Strategic Plan (OPSP), 13-14, 86, 90-91
Leonsis, Ted, 44                                               107-108, 123-140, 150, 174, 177
                                                               One-PHRASE Strategy, 13, 110, 116-118, 120-122
Manogue, Gary, 64                                            OTG Software, 184-185, 188
Market Dynamics, 31-32                                         Outback Steakhouse, 71, 119-120
Markitforce, 126, 165
Marquet, L. David, 29                                       Parsons, Guy, 54
Marr, Bernard, 49                                             Patterson, Kerry, 35
Mask, Clate, 1                                                Perceptionist, 22, 27
Mayer-Schönberger, Viktor, 162                                Perly Fullerton, 48
McGovern, Henry, 76, 172                                     Perly, James, 48
Medvec, Victoria, 202                                        Phillips, Lisa, 99
Meeting Rhythm, 9, 16, 175-190                                Pink, Daniel H., 70, 72
Melbourne, Lois, 73                                           Porras, Jerry I., 6, 96, 120
MemberHealth, 23                                              Porter, Michael E., 13, 86, 117, 118
Microsoft MapPoint, 209-210                                   Power of One, The, 18, 195, 197, 219-233
Milner, Joss, 219                                             PPR Talent Management Group, 203
Miltz, Alan, 195, 219                                        Prabhu, Ajay, 167
Mindshare, 110-111, 116
Miner Corporation, The, 173                                   Prahalad, C.K., 98-99
Mohanty, Sanjeev, 167, 204                                    Priorities, 9, 29, 72, 127, 131, 134, 137, 149-160, 173,
Moler, Kelly, 63, 66                                         174, 185
MOM's Organic Market, 59, 63, 65, 66, 70, 71, 72,             Process Accountability Chart (PACe), 11, 36, 39, 52-57
75, 78-79, 204                                                Profit per X, 13, 110, 120-121, 129-130, 150
Moore, J. Stuart, 76, 95                                      ProService Hawaii, 152-153, 158-159
Morrison, Simon, 41, 171                                      Provident Security, 53-54
Morriss, Anne, 76, 116-117                                   Pulizzi, Joe, 112
Mullins, John W., 17, 200, 205                               Purpose: See Core Purpose

Nash, Scott, 59, 63, 65, 66, 71, 72, 204                     Quarterly Theme: See Theme

                                                                                                          245

---

   Scaling Up

   QuEST Global Engineering Pvt. Ltd., 167               Stack, Jack, 50, 72, 152, 157, 158
                                                         Start/Stop/Keep, 16, 137, 140, 164, 165
   Rackspace Hosting, 64, 115                           Steinfeld, Jay, 76
   Ratliff, John, 93, 95, 99-105                         Stepleton, John, 53
   Raytheon, 24, 158                                     Stewart, Thomas A., 210
   RedBalloon, 114-115, 121, 173                        Street, Randy, 65
   Reichheld, Fred, 170                                 Stucks/Constraints, 183
   rewards, 81, 104, 127, 133, 149, 153, 157             Sullivan, Chris, 119-120
   Ries, Eric, 4, 53                                     SWT (strengths, weaknesses, and trends), 13, 14, 86,
   Ritz-Carlton, 43, 105, 181                            89, 137, 138-139, 235
   Roche, Stephen, 41
   Rockefeller Habits Checklist™", 15-17, 146, 147      Taleb, Nassim Nicholas, 4
  150-151, 235                                          Tannas, Scott, 26-27
   Rockefeller, John D., 15, 175, 208                   Targets, 130-131, 133
   Rocks, 125, 127, 132-133, 154, 171, 172, 205         Theme, 16, 29, 105, 133, 153-156, 157, 158-159, 235
  Rudy, Alan, 21-23, 121                               Think, Plan, Act, Learn, 12
                                                        Tobin, Jim, 149, 152
  Salisbury Landscaping, 203                            Topgrading, 59-60, 65-66, 70
  Sandbox, 109, 112-114, 131                            Towne Park, 126, 182
  Sapient, 76, 95                                      Twist, Lynne, 45
  scoreboards, 17, 133, 173                            Tyabji, Hatim, 94, 96
  scorecards, 167, 172
  Scott, David Meerman, 77, 111                        Values: See Core Values
  Shine Lawyers, 41, 171                               VeriFone, 94, 96
  Sim, Ken, 53-55                                     Virtual Technology Corporation (VTC), 24, 158
  Simon, Hermann, 31, 85                               Vision Summary, 2, 12-13, 86, 88, 124-125, 235
  Simple Numbers, 207, 210, 214, 221, 227
  Simson, Naomi, 114-115, 121                         Western Financial Group (WFG), 26-27
  Situational Leadership, 79-80                       Who, What, When (WWW), 15, 146, 148, 185, 186
  Sleep Health Supplies: See Good Night Medical         Winterhalter Gastronom, 114
 Smart, Bradford D., 59-60, 65                        Wiseman, Liz, 5, 75, 79
 Smart, Geoff, 59-60, 61, 65                          Womack, Jim, 54
Smith, Carey, 164
Softonic, 55                                          X-Factor, 13, 110, 119- 120, 122
South, Jerry, 126
 Souza, Brian, 79, 80                                 Yoffie, David B., 177
Speed Wire, 66
Sproule, Adam, 203                                    Zigarmi, Drea, 80
SRC Holdings, 50, 157                                 Zigarmi, Patricia, 80

246